AdaptFormer: Adapting Vision Transformers for
Scalable Visual Recognition
Shoufa Chen1∗ Chongjian Ge1∗ Zhan Tong2 Jiangliu Wang2,3
Yibing Song2 Jue Wang2 Ping Luo1
1The University of Hong Kong 2Tencent AI Lab 3The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Abstract
Although the pre-trained Vision Transformers (ViTs) achieved great success in
computer vision, adapting a ViT to various image and video tasks is challenging
because of its heavy computation and storage burdens, where each model needs
to be independently and comprehensively ﬁne-tuned to different tasks, limiting
its transferability in different domains. To address this challenge, we propose an
effective adaptation approach for Transformer, namely AdaptFormer, which can
adapt the pre-trained ViTs into many different image and video tasks efﬁciently.
It possesses several beneﬁts more appealing than prior arts. Firstly, AdaptFormer
introduces lightweight modules that only add less than 2% extra parameters to
a ViT, while it is able to increase the ViT’s transferability without updating its
original pre-trained parameters, signiﬁcantly outperforming the existing 100% fully
ﬁne-tuned models on action recognition benchmarks. Secondly, it can be plug-and-
play in different Transformers and scalable to many visual tasks. Thirdly, extensive
experiments on ﬁve image and video datasets show that AdaptFormer largely
improves ViTs in the target domains. For example, when updating just 1.5% extra
parameters, it achieves about 10% and 19% relative improvement compared to the
fully ﬁne-tuned models on Something-Something v2 and HMDB51, respectively.
Project page: http://www.shoufachen.com/adaptformer-page.
1 Introduction
There is a growing interest in adopting a general neural model to tackle a large variety of different
tasks since it beneﬁts in reducing the need for task-speciﬁc model design and training. Recently,
Transformer [71] demonstrates great potential in this goal considering its success in various ﬁelds,
e.g., natural language processing (NLP) [ 24, 9, 72, 78], visual recognition [27, 69, 80, 56], dense
prediction [73, 10, 88, 86, 76], Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [ 46, 42], reinforcement
learning (RL) [17, 15, 77], robotics [44, 22], and etc. However, existing literature in computer vision
tend to focus on the same network with task-speciﬁc weights scenario, where a single network is
used to train from scratch or fully ﬁne-tune on a speciﬁc dataset, making it infeasible to maintain a
separate model weight for every dataset when the number of task grows, especially for the increasing
model capacity of state-of-the-art models (e.g., ViT-G/14 [83] with over 1.8 billion parameters).
Different from prior arts, we step into the direction of developing same network with almost same
weights and achieve superior performance than the full-tuning approach by only tuning less than
2% parameters, with the remaining over 98% parameters shared across different tasks. There are
two challenges to learning universal representations using a single model. The ﬁrst one lies in the
pre-training stage, which requires algorithms that can learn well-generalized representations that are
easy to be applied to many tasks. Recent arts in self-supervised learning [11, 5, 37, 87, 75, 68, 29]
∗Equal contribution.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2205.13535v1  [cs.CV]  26 May 2022