can serve as a solution to this challenge. The second one, which is our main concern in this work, is
to build an effective pipeline that can adapt the model obtained at the pre-training stage to various
downstream tasks by tuning parameters as less as possible and keeping the left parameters frozen.
While ﬁne-tuning pre-trained models has been widely studied in NLP [6, 40, 62, 63, 52, 50, 41, 82,
55, 36], this topic is seldomly explored in the vision, where full tine-tuning of model parameters is
still the dominant strategy for adapting vision transformers. However, the full ﬁne-tuning cannot
satisfy the goal of universal representation as it assigns an independent set of weights for every task.
Linear probing is a straightforward approach to maintaining the pre-trained model ﬁxed by only
tuning a speciﬁc lightweight classiﬁcation head for every task. However, linear probing tends to
have an unsatisfactory performance and misses the opportunity of pursuing strong but non-linear
features [37], which indeed beneﬁt deep learning. More recently, Bahng et.al., [4] aimed to adapt
pre-trained models by modifying raw input pixel space. Jia et.al., [45] proposed Visual Prompt
Tuning (VPT) to adapt transformer models for downstream vision tasks, which prepends several
learnable parameters (prompts) to the patch embeddings and freezes the whole pre-trained backbone.
<𝟎.𝟐%parameters
Figure 1: Parameter-Accuracy trade-off. We lever-
age ViT-Base as backbone and report top-1 accuracy on
SSv2 dataset. AdaptFormer can surpass full-tuning with
only 0.2% tunable parameters. More detailed results are
shown in Table 1.
In this work, we propose a lightweight module,
namely AdaptFormer, to adapt vision transform-
ers by updating the weights of AdaptFormer. We
introduce learnable parameters from the model
perspective, which is different from VPT, which
inserts learnable parameters into the token space.
Our AdaptFormer is conceptually simple yet
effective. It consists of two fully connected
layers, a non-linear activation function, and a
scaling factor. This module is set in parallel to
the feed-forward network (FFN) of the original
ViT model, as shown in Figure 2b. This design
is turned out to be effective for model transfer
when processing scalable visual tokens for both
image and video data (i.e., image data consists
of a small scale of visual tokens while video
data consists of a large scale). As shown in Fig-
ure 1, compared with the full-tuning strategy,
AdaptFormer achieves comparable performance
on video recognition with only about 0.1% tunable parameters. Meanwhile, with less than 2% tunable
parameters, AdaptFormer surpasses the full-tuning solution by about 10% on top-1 accuracy. Similar
approaches are also proposed in ﬁne-tuning pre-trained language models (PLMs) [6, 40, 63, 36].
The key contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: (1) We propose a simple yet effective
framework, namely AdaptFormer, for adapting vision transformers to a large variety of downstream
visual recognition tasks and avoiding catastrophic interference with each other. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that explores efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning in video action recognition.
(2) We ablate many design choices and demonstrate the superior robustness of AdaptFormer when
parameters scale up. (3) Extensive experiments on various downstream tasks demonstrate that
AdaptFormer outperforms existing ﬁne-tuning approaches signiﬁcantly. By demonstrating the
effectiveness of AdaptFormer on multiple visual benchmarks, we hope our work could inspire the
research communities to rethink the ﬁne-tuning mechanism in computer vision and make progress
toward a ﬂexible yet universal Transformer model for visual recognition.
2 Related Works
In the proposed AdaptFormer, we mainly introduce a plug-and-play module for efﬁciently ﬁne-tuning
the current vision Transformer models. In this section, we perform a literature review on related
works from two perspectives, i.e., the vision Transformers, and efﬁcient transfer learning for vision
Transformers.
2.1 Transformer in Vision
The Transformer architecture is ﬁrst introduced in [71] and has re-energized the natural language
processing (NLP) ﬁeld from then on [24, 9]. Inspired by its huge success, researches in the computer
2