vision ﬁled have also evolved into Transformer era since ViTs [ 27]. The strong capability of
modeling long-range relation has facilitated Transformer in various vision tasks, including image
classiﬁcation [27, 56, 54], object detection [10, 88, 20], semantic/instance segmentation [76], video
understanding [7, 2, 28, 51], point cloud modeling [85, 35], 3D Object Recognition [18] and even
low-level processing [16, 53, 74]. Furthermore, transformers have advanced the vision recognition
performance by a large-scale pretraining [19, 60, 12, 30, 37, 68, 64]. In such a situation, given the
pre-trained Transformer models, which are more larger than the previously prevalent CNN backbones,
one open question is how to ﬁne-tune the big vision models so that they can be adapted into more
speciﬁc down-stream tasks. To solve the open question, we propose AdaptFormer to transfer ViTs
from the pre-trained pre-texts into the target tasks in a more effective and efﬁcient way.
2.2 Efﬁcient Transfer learning for Transformers
Transfer learning targets re-adopting a pre-trained model (either via the supervised or the unsupervised
manner) as the starting point and further ﬁne-tuning the speciﬁc model on a new task. In the NLP
ﬁeld, transferring the large pre-trained language models (PLMs) [24, 9] into downstream tasks has
been the popular paradigm for a long time. Conventional arts [24, 9] set all the network parameters
as learnable ones and adapt them to the target tasks. However, with the growth of model sizes and
the complexity of the speciﬁc tasks, the conventional paradigm is inevitably limited by the huge
computational burden. The NLP community has explored several ways for parameter-efﬁcient transfer
learning that only set a few parameters learnable and ﬁne-tune them for efﬁciency. The pioneer
works could be mainly categorized from the token [52, 50] and network perspectives [40, 41, 82, 34].
Basically speaking, the token-related methods [ 50, 52] typically prepend several learnable preﬁx
vectors/tokens to the projected tokens within the multi-head self-attention layers (MHSA [71]). The
philosophy behind it is to assist the pre-trained models in understanding downstream tasks with the
guidance of extra token information. On the other hand, network-related methods [40, 41] integrate
shallow modules to improve the model transferability. The introduced modules adapt the produced
representations into the downstream tasks via features fusion.
Recently, with the emergence of a much more large-scale dataset [ 23, 65, 66, 59, 47], increasing
researchers in computer vision have adopted the homologous paradigm, i.e., ﬁrst pre-training and
then ﬁne-tuning, to advance the vision tasks. As for the second stage, traditional methods typically
adopt the full-tuning arts in the downstream tasks. Rare attention has been drawn to the ﬁeld of
efﬁcient adaptation, especially in the ﬁeld of vision Transformers. Inspired by Prompting in NLP,
[45] introduced the learnable tokens in exploring the efﬁcient adaptation for ViTs. We empirically
found that the performance of prompting is hindered by the scale of tokens. That is to say, for the
tasks where the number of tokens is on a small scale, e.g., image classiﬁcation, Prompting is efﬁcient
for improving the model transferability. However, for larger scale tokens,e.g., video understanding,
Prompting presents limited potential. This observation motivates us to introduce AdaptFormer, which
is effective in the scenarios of scalable visual tokens.
3 Approach
We propose AdaptFormer for efﬁciently transferring large pre-trained vision transformer models
to downstream tasks, in both image and video domains. AdaptFormer attains strong transfer learn-
ing abilities by only ﬁne-tuning a small number of extra parameters, circumventing catastrophic
interference among tasks. We illustrate the overall framework of AdaptFormer in Figure 2b.
3.1 Preliminary and Notation
Vision Transformers (ViTs) are ﬁrst introduced by [27] into vision recognition. A vanilla vision
Transformer basically consists of a patch embedding layer and several consecutively connected
encoders, as depicted in Figure 2a. Given an image x∈ RH×W×3, the patch embedding layer ﬁrst
splits and ﬂatten the sample x into sequential patches xp∈ RN×(P 2d), where (H , W ) represents
the height and width of the input image, (P, P ) is the resolution of each image patch, d denotes
the output channel, and N = HW /P 2 is the number of image tokens. The overall combination
of a prepended [CLS] token and the image tokens xp are further fed into Transformer encoders for
attention calculation.
3