Fine-tuning. During the ﬁne-tuning phase, the original model parts (blue blocks in Figure 2b)
load weights from the pre-trained checkpoint and keeps untouched, avoiding interaction among
downstream tasks. The newly added parameters (orange blocks) are updated on the speciﬁc data
domain with the task-speciﬁc losses.
Inference. After ﬁne-tuning, we still keep the shared parameters frozen as in the previous ﬁne-
tuning state, and additionally load the weights of the extra parameters that were ﬁne-tuned in the
previous stage. The single overall model is able to be adapted to multiple tasks with the assistance of
lightweight introduced modules.
3.3 Discussion
Tunable parameters analysis. Our AdaptMLP module is lightweight. The total number of param-
eters introduced to per layer is 2× d× ˆd + ˆd + d, which includes biases parameters. The middle
dimension ˆd is a small value compared with d (AdaptFormer still obtains a decent performance even
when ˆd = 1, as discussed in Sec. 4.4). Since most of the shared parameters are ﬁxed and the number
of newly introduced parameters is small (< 2% of the pre-trained model parameters), the total model
size grows slowly when more downstream tasks are added.
LinearLinearLinear
Scale
Softmax
𝑄 𝐾 𝑉
Linear
EmbeddedPatches
Multi-Head Attention
Before Linear
After LinearAfter Linear
Figure 3: Prompt tuning illustra-
tion.
Applicability. We note that AdaptMLP is a plug-and-play
module that can be adaptively inserted into existing popu-
lar vision transformer architectures [27, 56, 73, 80, 21, 26]
since all of the backbones share the same MLP layers even
though they differ in the MHSA architectures (as shown in
Figure 2b). Compared to our methods, we notice that recent
prompt-related approaches insert trainable parameters into
the token space, as illustrated in Figure 3. They prepend
learnable parameters either into the embedded tokens before
linear projection [52] or the key and value tokens after lin-
ear projection [45]. Therefore, the prompt-related method
can not be straightforwardly adapted to special MHSA vari-
ants, especially for the one that takes the pyramid spatial
information into account [56, 73]. Besides, we empirically
observe that prompt-related methods perform not well when
the number of patch tokens grows up from image to video
scale, as shown in Figure 1.
In summary, we present a strategy for tuning a pre-trained vision Transformer on a set of scalable
vision recognition tasks (e.g.image domain and video domain). It adds limited learnable parameters
for tuning while achieving comparable or even better performance than the full-tuning strategy.
Moreover, AdaptFormer could serve as a generic module for a large variety of recognition tasks.
4 Experiments
We evaluate the effectiveness of AdaptFormer by conducting extensive visual recognition experiments
in both the image and video domains. We ﬁrst describe our experimental settings in Sec. 4.1, covering
the pre-trained backbones, baseline methods, downstream tasks and training details. We then compare
AdaptFormer with baseline methods and provide a thorough analysis in Sec. 4.2. In addition, we also
conduct ablation studies to explore different experimental conﬁgurations and explain what makes for
the superiority of AdaptFormer in Sec 4.4.
4.1 Experimental Settings
Pre-trained backbone. We adopt the plain Vision Transformer (ViT) [27], i.e., ViT-Base (ViT-B/16)
as our backbone model and pre-train the model with both supervised and self-supervised approaches.
Speciﬁcally, forimage, we directly use the ImageNet-21k [23] supervised pre-trained model3 and
MAE [37] self-supervised model4. For video, we take both supervised and self-supervised pre-trained
3https://github.com/rwightman/pytorch-image-models/releases/download/v0.1-vitjx/jx_vit_base_patch16_
224_in21k-e5005f0a.pth
5