One Initialization to Rule them All: Fine-tuning via
Explained Variance Adaptation
Fabian Paischer1* Lukas Hauzenberger1* Thomas Schmied1
Benedikt Alkin1,3 Marc Peter Deisenroth2 Sepp Hochreiter1,3
1 ELLIS Unit, LIT AI Lab, Institute for Machine Learning, JKU Linz, Austria
2 University College London
3 NXAI GmbH, Linz, Austria
paischer@ml.jku.at
Abstract
Foundation models (FMs) are pre-trained on large-scale datasets and then fine-
tuned on a downstream task for a specific application. The most successful and
most commonly used fine-tuning method is to update the pre-trained weights via
a low-rank adaptation (LoRA). LoRA introduces new weight matrices that are
usually initialized at random with a uniform rank distribution across model weights.
Recent works focus on weight-driven initialization or learning of adaptive ranks
during training. Both approaches have only been investigated in isolation, resulting
in slow convergence or a uniform rank distribution, in turn leading to sub-optimal
performance. We propose to enhance LoRA by initializing the new weights in a
data-driven manner by computing singular value decomposition on minibatches
of activation vectors. Then, we initialize the LoRA matrices with the obtained
right-singular vectors and re-distribute ranks among all weight matrices to explain
the maximal amount of variance and continue the standard LoRA fine-tuning
procedure. This results in our new method Explained Variance Adaptation (EV A).
We apply EV A to a variety of fine-tuning tasks ranging from language generation
and understanding to image classification and reinforcement learning. EV A exhibits
faster convergence than competitors and attains the highest average score across a
multitude of tasks per domain.
1 Introduction
Foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021, FMs) are usually trained on large-scale data and then
fine-tuned towards a particular downstream task. This training paradigm has led to significant
advancements in the realm of language modeling (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a; Reid et al.,
2024), computer vision (Dehghani et al., 2023; Oquab et al., 2023), and reinforcement learning
(Brohan et al., 2023; Zitkovich et al., 2023). With an increasing number of model parameters,
the process of fine-tuning becomes prohibitively expensive. This results in the need for efficient
alternatives to fine-tuning all parameters of the pre-trained model.
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) approaches are commonly used as an effective alternative to
full fine-tuning (FFT). PEFT methods modify the pre-trained model by introducing a small number
of new trainable parameters, while the pre-trained weights remain frozen. This leads to a substantial
reduction in computational cost, both in terms of time and space. A particularly successful approach,
LoRA (Hu et al., 2022), introduces new weights in the form of a low-rank decomposition for each
weight matrix in the pre-trained model. After training, the new weights can be readily merged into
*Equal contribution
arXiv:2410.07170v1  [cs.LG]  9 Oct 2024