The computation of SVD introduces computational overhead in the initial training stage. Since we
do not require gradient computation or storing of optimizer states, there is no overhead in terms
of memory. SVD has a time complexity of O(min(b2d, bd2)) which can be reduced to O(k2b) for
k << d by randomly choosing k columns from X as introduced in Halko et al. (2011). Let T
be the number of minibatches until all components are converged for N weight matrices, then the
time complexity is O(N T k2b). In other words, the complexity scales linearly with the number of
weight matrices and the number of minibatches. To speed up the computation of SVD, we provide an
implementation that runs entirely on GPU.
3.3 Adaptive Rank Allocation
The singular values obtained by SVD provide an estimate of the variance that is explained by their
components. Leveraging this information, we can redistribute ranks across weight matrices of the
pre-trained model such that the maximum amount of variance is explained. This can be done by
allocating more ranks to layers that propagate more information, i.e., explain more variance. More
formally, the variance explained by each component in vi
j,: is given by their explained variance ratio
ξi
j = σi2
j
(M − 1)||σi||1
, (3)
where || · ||1 denotes the ℓ1 norm, σi is a vector containing all r singular values, and M is the total
number of samples used for the incremental SVD computation. Next, we sort the components vi
j,: for
each weight matrix in descending order according to their explained variance ratio ξi
j. Finally, we
assign ranks to pre-traiend weights until we reach a certain rank budget.
Algorithm 1 Fine-tuning via EV A
Input: FM ψ(·), ρ, rank r, dataset D
1: while not all_converged (ψ) do
2: X ← ψ(next(D)) ▷ get activations
3: Vnew, ξ ← SVD(X, ρr)
4: if isclose(Vold, vnew) then
5: wrap_and_initialize(Wj, Vnew)
6: end if
7: Vold ← Vnew
8: end while
9: redistribute_ranks(ψ, ξ, Vnew)
10: lora_finetune(ψ, X)
Additionally, we introduce a hyperparameter
ρ ∈ [1, ∞) which controls the uniformity of the
rank distribution. ρ determines the number of
ranks that we compute during SVD and increas-
ing ρ allows for an increasingly heterogeneous
rank distribution. That is, for each W i we com-
pute rρ components initially meaning we obtain
N rρ components in total. For the redistribution
we only use the top N r components accord-
ing to their explained variance ratio ξi
j. Thus,
setting ρ = 1 , results in a uniform rank distri-
bution as in LoRA, but initialized according to
EV A. Therefore,ρ provides us with the means
to change the rank distribution in a controlled
manner prior to fine-tuning at the initialization
stage, as opposed to learning it throughout the
training process as done in prior works (Zhang et al., 2023a; Valipour et al., 2023; Meo et al., 2024).
In practice we found that the redistribution converges for values of ρ > 2 (see Appendix G). Finally,
we initialize B with zeros and perform the standard LoRA fine-tuning, as recommended in Hayou
et al. (2024a). In Algorithm 1 we provide pseudocode for EV A.
4 Experiments
First, we elaborate on implementation details of EV A in Section 4.1. Then, we show results for
fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) on math and reasoning tasks in Section 4.2 and language
understanding tasks in Section 4.3. Further we show results for image classification in Section 4.4 and
decision making tasks in Section 4.5. Finally, in Section 4.6 we demonstrate that the computational
overhead induced by EV A over LoRA is negligible and that incremental SVD converges and is
invariant to batch order and batch size.
4.1 Implementation Details
We follow the standard LoRA training procedure from Hu et al. (2022). Similar to Kalajdzievski
(2023), we found LoRA training to be very sensitive to the scaling parameter α. Therefore, we
5