Figure 1: Left: EV A performs singular value decomposition on activation vectors for the first few
minibatches to obtain a suitable initialization for the LoRA matrix A. Right: After initializing A,
we allocate ranks to maximize the explained variance throughout the model and continue the standard
LoRA fine-tuning procedure, where W is kept frozen and only A and B are trained.
the pre-trained weights without any additional inference latency. Recent research has explored two
main avenues for enhancing LoRA: weight-driven initialization and adaptive rank allocation during
training (see Table 1). While weight-driven initialization methods have shown promise, they typically
rely on a uniform rank distribution across pre-trained weights. Further, they are constrained to the
information stored in the pre-trained weights. Finally, existing adaptive rank allocation techniques
initialize low-rank matrices randomly.
We propose a new method based on LoRA that combines adaptive rank allocation with data-driven
initialization by leveraging information from the downstream task at hand. Certain activation patterns
of FMs have shown to be crucial for model performance (Sun et al., 2024). Therefore, we leverage
minibatches of activations computed on downstream data to initialize LoRA weights. To this end,
we propagate minibatches of the fine-tuning data through the model and compute the singular value
decomposition (SVD) on activation vectors to obtain the right-singular vectors. We then sort the right-
singular vectors in descending order according to the variance they explain. Finally, we leverage the
top-k components according to a given rank budget for initializing LoRA. This results in an effective
initialization, that (i) is data-driven by leveraging information from the downstream task, and (ii)
allocates ranks to pre-trained weights to maximize the explained variance throughout the model. We
call the resulting method EV A, which is short forExplained Variance Adaptation. Importantly, this
procedure can be performed within the first few minibatches of LoRA fine-tuning without significant
computational overhead.
We demonstrate the benefits of EV A on an array of downstream tasks, namely language generation
and understanding, image classification, and reinforcement learning (RL). EV A consistently improves
average performance across a multitude of tasks on each domain compared to LoRA and other
recently proposed initialization or rank redistribution methods. For language generation, we fine-tune
7B-9B parameter language models on math and reasoning tasks, where EV A attains the highest
average performance. Further, on a set of language understanding tasks, EV A improves the average
performance compared to competitors. On image classification we fine-tune a pre-trained vision
transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) on a set of 19 diverse tasks. We find that EV A attains the
highest average score and improves over LoRA and established extensions thereof, with most gains
on in-domain data. For our RL experiments we conduct fine-tuning on continuous control tasks and
find that EV A significantly exceeds performance of LoRA and even exceeds performance of full
fine-tuning (FFT) when combined with DoRA (Liu et al., 2024a). Finally, we conduct ablation studies
to demonstrate that the combination of direction and scale of EV A leads to the best performance.
2 Related Work
LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) has sparked widespread interest in leveraging low-rank decompositions for
fine-tuning due to its simplicity. Building on the success of LoRA, a number of other variants have
been proposed (Kopiczko et al., 2024; Zi et al., 2023; Babakniya et al., 2023; Dettmers et al., 2023; Li
2