model’s usable sequence length [14, 19, 21, 25]. More importantly, these prior attempts sometimes
fail to match the ﬁne-tuning baselines, posing a trade-off between efﬁciency and model quality.
We take inspiration from [1, 20] which show that the learned over-parametrized models in fact reside
on a low intrinsic dimension. We hypothesize that the update matrices in language model adaptation
also have a low “intrinsic rank”, leading to our proposed Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) approach.
LoRA allows us to train every dense layer in a neural network indirectly by injecting and optimizing
rank decomposition matrices of the dense layer’s update instead, while keeping the original matrices
frozen, as shown in Fig. 1. Using GPT-3 175B as an example, we show that a very low rank (i.e., r in
Fig. 1 can be one or two) sufﬁces even when the full rank (i.e.,d) is as high as 12288, making LoRA
both space- and compute-efﬁcient.
LoRA possesses several key advantages as follows.
• A single pre-trained model can be shared and used to build many small LoRA modules for
different tasks. We can keep the shared original model in VRAM and efﬁciently switch tasks by
replacing the matrices A and B in Fig. 1, which signiﬁcantly reduces the storage requirement and
task-switching overhead.
• It makes training more efﬁcient and lowers the hardware barrier to entry by 3 times, since we do
not need to calculate the gradients or maintain the optimizer states for most model parameters
when using adaptive optimizers. Instead, we only optimize the injected low-rank matrices, which
have much fewer parameters.
• Its simple linear design allows us to merge the update matrices with the original weights during
deployment, introducing no inference latency.
• LoRA is orthogonal to prior techniques and can be combined with many of them (such as
preﬁx-tuning). We provide an example in Appendix D.
Terminologies We make frequent references to the Transformer architecture and use the conven-
tional terminologies for its dimensions. We call its hidden size, or the size of its activations, dmodel.
We use Wq, Wk, Wv, and Wo to refer to the query/key/value/output projection matrices in the
self-attention module. W or W0 refers to a pre-trained weight matrix and ∆W its update during
adaptation. We use r to denote the rank of a LoRA module.
2 Problem Statement
While our proposal is agnostic to the training objective, we focus on language modeling as the
primary use case. Below is a brief description of the language modeling problem and, in particular,
the maximization of conditional probabilities given a task-speciﬁc prompt.
Suppose we are given a pre-trained autoregressive language model pΦ(y|x) that is parametrized
by Φ. For instance, pΦ(y|x) can be a generic multi-task learner such as GPT-2 [ 32] or GPT-3
[6] based on the Transformer architecture [36]. Now, consider adapting this pre-trained model to
(possibly multiple) downstream conditional text generation tasks, such as summarization, machine
reading comprehension (MRC), and natural language to SQL (NL2SQL). Each downstream task
is represented by a training dataset of context-target pairs: Z ={(xi, yi)}i=1,..,N , where both xi
and yi are sequences of tokens. For example, in NL2SQL, xi is a natural language query and yi its
equivalent SQL command; for summarization, xi is the content of an article and yi its short summary.
During ﬁne-tuning, the model is initialized with pre-trained parametersΦ0 and updated to Φ0 + ∆Φ
by repeatedly following the gradient to maximize the conditional language modeling objective:
max
Φ
∑
(x,y)∈Z
|y|∑
t=1
log (pΦ(yt|x, y<t)) (1)
One of the main drawbacks for full ﬁne-tuning is that foreach downstream task, we learn a different
set of parameters ∆Φ whose dimensions|∆Φ| equals|Φ0|. Thus, if the pre-trained model is large
(such as GPT-3 with|Φ0|≈ 175 Billion), storing and deploying many independent instances of
ﬁne-tuned models can be challenging, if at all plausible.
2