In this paper, we adopt a parameter-efﬁcient approach, where the task-speciﬁc parameter increment
∆Φ = ∆Φ(Θ) is further encoded by a much smaller-sized set of parametersΘ with|Θ|≪| Φ0|. The
task of ﬁnding∆Φ thus becomes optimizing over Θ:
max
Θ
∑
(x,y)∈Z
|y|∑
t=1
log
(
pΦ0+∆Φ(Θ)(yt|x, y<t)
)
(2)
As we shall see in the subsequent sections, we propose to use a low-rank representation to encode
∆Φ that is both computational and memory efﬁcient. When the pre-trained model is GPT-3, the size
of trainable parameters|Θ| can be as small as 0.01% of|Φ0|.
3 Our Method
We describe the simple design of LoRA and its practical implications. The principles outlined here
apply to any dense layers in deep learning models, though we only focus on certain weights in
Transformers in our experiments for practical reasons.
Low-Rank Constraint on Update Matrices. A typical neural network contains numerous dense
layers that perform matrix multiplication. The weight matrices in these layers are allowed to have
full-rank. When adapting to a speciﬁc task, however, Aghajanyan et al. [1] shows that the pre-
trained language models have a low “instrisic dimension” and can still learn efﬁciently despite a
low-dimensional reparametrization. Inspired by this observation, we wonder if the updates to the
weights also have a low “intrinsic rank" when adapting to downstream tasks. For a pre-trained
weight matrix W0∈ Rd×k, we constrain its update by representing it with a low-rank decomposition
W0+∆W = W0+BA, where B∈ Rd×r, A∈ Rr×k, and the rank r≪ min(d, k). During training,
W0 is frozen and does not receive gradient updates, while A and B contain trainable parameters.
Note both W0 and ∆W = BA are multiplied with the same input, and their respective output vectors
are summed coordinate-wise. For h = W0x, our modiﬁed forward pass yields:
h = W0x + ∆W x = W0x + BAx (3)
We illustrate our reparametrization in Fig. 1. We use a random Gaussian initialization for A and zero
for B, so ∆W = BA is zero at the beginning of training. We then scale ∆W x by 1
r during training
to keep the coordinates of ∆W x roughly Θ(1) in r after training [? ].
Weight Decay to Pre-trained Weights. We note that weight decay behaves differently with LoRA
than with full ﬁne-tuning. Speciﬁcally, preforming the usual weight decay onA and B is similar to
decaying back to the pre-trained weights, which has been studied as a potentially effective form of
regularization against “catastrophic forgetting” [ 16, 18]. While extensive experiments isolating its
effect is out-of-scope for this work, we believe that this, coupled with a constrained parameter space,
might provide some regularization advantages. For example, see how LoRA withr = dmodel = 1024
outperforms full ﬁne-tuning on GPT-2 Medium in Sec. 5.3 and Sec. G.2.
No Additional Inference Latency. During deployment, we can explicitly computeW = W0 + BA
and perform inference as usual. When we need to switch to another downstream task, we can recover
W0 by subtracting BA and then adding a different B′A′. This causes a minor increase in peak
memory usage and adds a latency to model switching that does not exceed a single model forward
pass. Critically, we do not introduce any additional latency during inference in return.
3.1 Applying LoRA to Transformer
In principle, we can apply LoRA to any subset of weight matrices in a neural network to reduce the
number of trainable parameters. In the Transformer architecture, there are four weight matrices in the
self-attention module (Wq, Wk, Wv, Wo) and two in the MLP module. We treat Wq (or Wk, Wv) as
a single matrix of dimension dmodel× dmodel, even though the output dimension is usually sliced
into attention heads. We limit our study to only changing the attention weights for downstream
tasks and freeze the MLP modules (so they are not trained in downstream tasks) since applying LoRA
to the latter results in 4 times the number of trainable parameters given the same rank r. We further
study the effect on adapting different types of weight matrices in a Transformer in Sec. 6.1.
3