Practical Beneﬁts and Limitations. The most signiﬁcant beneﬁt comes from the reduction in
memory and storage usage. For a Transformer, we reduce the VRAM consumption by 2/3 if
r≪ dmodel as we do not need to keep track of the optimizer states for the frozen parameters. We also
reduce the checkpoint size by roughly dmodel
2γr times, where γ is the fraction of weight matrices on
which we apply LoRA. On GPT-3, our motivating use case, we reduce the VRAM consumption from
1.2TB to 350GB. With r = 4 and γ = 1/6, the checkpoint size is reduced by roughly 10,000× (from
350GB to 35MB)3. This allows us to train with signiﬁcantly fewer GPUs and avoid I/O bottlenecks.
Another beneﬁt is that during deployment, we can switch between tasks at a much lower cost by only
swapping the LoRA weights, often measured in megabytes, as opposed to all the weights (350GB).
This allows for the creation of many customized models that can be activated and deactivated on the
ﬂy on machines that store the pre-trained weights. We also observe a 25% speedup during training as
we do not need to calculate the gradient for the vast majority of the parameters.
On the other hand, LoRA has its limitations. For example, it is not straightforward to batch inputs to
different tasks with different A and B in a single forward pass, because we absorb A and B into W
to prevent additional inference latency.
4 Related Works
Transformer Language Models. Transformer [36] is a sequence-to-sequence architecture that
makes heavy use of self-attention. [31] applied it to autoregressive language modeling by using a
stack of Transformer decoders. Since then, Transformer-based language models have dominated
NLP, achieving the state-of-the-art in many tasks. A new paradigm emerged with BERT [ 9] and
GPT-2 [32] – both are large Transformer language models trained on a large amount of text – where
ﬁne-tuning on task-speciﬁc data after pre-training on general domain data provides a signiﬁcant
performance gain compared to training on task-speciﬁc data directly. Training larger Transformers
generally results in better performance and remains an active research direction. GPT-3 [ 6] is the
largest single Transformer language model trained to-date with 175B parameters.
Prompt Engineering and Fine-Tuning. While GPT-3 175B can adapt its behavior with just a few
additional training examples, the result depends heavily on the input prompt [6]. This necessitates
an empirical art of composing and formatting the prompt to maximize a model’s performance on
a desired task, which is known as prompt engineering or prompt hacking. Fine-tuning retrains a
model pre-trained on general domains to a speciﬁc task [9, 31]. Variants of it include learning just a
subset of the parameters [8, 9], yet practitioners often retrain all of them to maximize the downstream
performance. However, the enormity of GPT-3 175B makes it challenging to perform ﬁne-tuning in
the usual way due to the large checkpoint it produces and the high hardware barrier to entry since it
has the same memory footprint as pre-training.
Parameter-Efﬁcient Adaptation. [15, 34] propose inserting adapter layers between existing layers
in a neural network. Our method uses a bottleneck structure similar to [ 15] to impose a low-rank
constraint on the weight updates. The key functional difference is that our learned weights can be
merged with the main weights during inference, thus not introducing any latency, which is not the
case for the adapter layers. More recently, [ 14, 19, 21, 25] proposed optimizing the input word
embeddings in lieu of ﬁne-tuning, akin to a continuous and differentiable generalization of prompt
engineering. We include comparisons with [ 21] in our experiment section. However, this line of
works can only scale up by using more special tokens in the prompt, which take up available sequence
length for task tokens when positional embeddings are learned.
Low-Rank Structures in Deep Learning. Low-rank structure is very common in machine learning.
A lot of machine learning problems have certain intrinsic low-rank structure [7, 13, 23, 24]. Moreover,
it is known that for many deep learning tasks, especially those with a heavily over-parametrized neural
network, the learned neural network will enjoy low-rank properties after training [29]. Some prior
works even explicitly impose the low-rank constraint when training the original neural network, such
as [17, 30, 35, 38, 39], however, to the best of our knowledge, none of these works considers low-rank
update for adaptation to downstream tasks. In theory literature, it is known that neural networks
outperform other classical learning methods, including the corresponding (ﬁnite-width) neural tangent
kernels [5, 22] when the underlying concept class has certain low-rank structure [2, 3, 11]. Another
3We still need the 350GB model during deployment; however, storing 100 adapted models only requires
350GB + 35MB * 100 ≈ 354GB as opposed to 100 * 350GB ≈ 35TB.
4