LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of
Large Language Models
Edward Hu∗ Yelong Shen∗ Phillip Wallis
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu Yuanzhi Li Shean Wang Weizhu Chen
Microsoft Corporation
{edwardhu, yeshe, phwallis, zeyuana, yuanzhil
swang, wzchen}@microsoft.com
Abstract
The dominant paradigm of natural language processing consists of large-scale
pre-training on general domain data and adaptation to particular tasks or domains.
As we pre-train larger models, conventional ﬁne-tuning, which retrains all model
parameters, becomes less feasible. Using GPT-3 175B as an example, deploying
many independent instances of ﬁne-tuned models, each with 175B parameters, is
extremely expensive. We propose Low-Rank Adaptation, or LoRA, which freezes
the pre-trained model weights and injects trainable rank decomposition matrices
into each layer of the Transformer architecture, greatly reducing the number of
trainable parameters for downstream tasks. For GPT-3, LoRA can reduce the
number of trainable parameters by 10,000 times and the computation hardware
requirement by 3 times compared to full ﬁne-tuning. LoRA performs on-par
or better than ﬁne-tuning in model quality on both GPT-3 and GPT-2, despite
having fewer trainable parameters, a higher training throughput, and no additional
inference latency. We also provide an empirical investigation into rank-deﬁciency in
language model adaptations, which sheds light on the efﬁcacy of LoRA. We release
our implementation in GPT-2 at https://github.com/microsoft/LoRA.
1 Introduction
Pretrained 
Weights
𝑊 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑑
x
h
𝐵 = 0
𝐴 = 𝒩(0, 𝜎2)
𝑑
𝑟
Pretrained 
Weights
𝑊 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑑
x
f(x)
𝑑
Figure 1: Our reparametriza-
tion. We only train A and B.
Many applications in natural language processing rely on adapting
one large scale, pre-trained language model to multiple downstream
applications. Such adaptation is usually done via ﬁne-tuning, which
updates all the parameters of the pre-trained model. The major
downside of ﬁne-tuning is that it requires storing as many parameters
as in the original model. As larger models are trained every few
months, this changes from a mere “inconvenience” for GPT-2 [ 32]
or BERT-large [9] to a critical deployment challenge for GPT-3 [6]
with 175 billion trainable parameters.2
Many researchers sought to mitigate this by adapting only some
parameters or learning external modules for new tasks. This way, we
only need to load a small number of task-speciﬁc parameters to the
pre-trained model for each task, which greatly boosts the deployment
efﬁciency. However, in practice, existing techniques either introduce
inference latency [15, 34] by extending model depth or reduce the
∗Equal contribution.
2While GPT-3 175B achieves non-trivial performance with few-shot learning, ﬁne-tuning boosts its perfor-
mance signiﬁcantly as shown in Appendix A.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2106.09685v1  [cs.CL]  17 Jun 2021