PISSA : PRINCIPAL SINGULAR VALUES AND SINGULAR
VECTORS ADAPTATION OF LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
Fanxu Meng1,2,3, Zhaohui Wang1, Muhan Zhang1,3
1Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
https://github.com/GraphPKU/PiSSA
ABSTRACT
As the parameters of large language models (LLMs) expand, the computational cost of fine-tuning the
entire model becomes prohibitive. To address this challenge, we introduce a parameter-efficient fine-
tuning (PEFT) method, Principal Singular values and Singular vectors Adaptation (PiSSA), which
optimizes a significantly reduced parameter space while achieving or surpassing the performance
of full-parameter fine-tuning. PiSSA is inspired by Intrinsic SAID, which suggests that pre-trained,
over-parametrized models inhabit a space of low intrinsic dimension. Consequently, PiSSA represents
a matrix W ∈ Rm×n within the model by the product of two trainable matrices A ∈ Rm×r and
B ∈ Rr×n, where r ≪ min(m, n), plus a residual matrix W res ∈ Rm×n for error correction.
Singular value decomposition (SVD) is employed to factorize W , and the principal singular values
and vectors of W are utilized to initialize A and B. The residual singular values and vectors
initialize the residual matrix W res, which keeps frozen during fine-tuning. Notably, PiSSA shares
the same architecture with Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), which hypothesizes that changes in model
parameters ∆W form a low-rank matrix. However, LoRA approximates ∆W through the product of
two matrices, A, initialized with Gaussian noise, and B, initialized with zeros, while PiSSA initializes
A and B with principal singular values and singular vectors of the original matrix W . Given that
the principal singular values and vectors capture the essence of a low-rank matrix, PiSSA can better
approximate the outcomes of full-parameter fine-tuning at the beginning by changing the essential
parts while freezing the “noisy” parts. In comparison, LoRA freezes the original matrix and updates
the “noise”. This distinction enables PiSSA to convergence much faster than LoRA and also achieve
better performance in the end. On five common benchmarks, PiSSA outperforms LoRA on all of
them using exactly the same setups except for a different initialization. On GSM8K, Mistral-7B
fine-tuned with PiSSA achieves an accuracy of 72.86%, outperforming LoRA’s 67.7% by 5.16%. Due
to the same architecture, PiSSA inherits many of LoRA’s advantages, such as parameter efficiency
and compatibility with quantization. Leveraging a fast SVD method, the initialization of PiSSA takes
only a few seconds, inducing negligible cost of switching LoRA to PiSSA.
1 Introduction
Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) is a highly effective technique for boosting their capabilities in various
tasks [1, 2, 3, 4], ensuring models to follow instructions [ 5, 6, 7], and instilling models with desirable behaviors
while eliminating undesirable ones [8, 9]. However, the fine-tuning process for very large models is accompanied by
prohibitive costs. For example, regular 16-bit fine-tuning of a LLaMA 65B parameter model requires over 780 GB of
GPU memory [10], and the VRAM consumption for training GPT-3 175B reaches 1.2TB [11]. Consequently, various
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [12, 13] methods have been proposed to reduce the number of parameters and
memory usage required for fine-tuning. Due to the ability to maintain the performance of full fine-tuning without
adding additional inference latency, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [11] has emerged as a popular PEFT method.
arXiv:2404.02948v1  [cs.LG]  3 Apr 2024