that the mesoscopic organisation of networks of the same category is
extraordinarily similar, concluding that: although the community
size distributions are always wide, certain categories of networks
consist mainly of tree-like communities, while others have denser
modules.
If we investigate the networks at the extremity of the intermediate
region, we find that the power grid network is a borderline case, one
that can be considered neither as LCP nor as non-LCP, and this
finding has strong significance. It has been proved that power grid
networks, which are human-designed and propagate electricity
rather than information, are neither scale-free nor clustered 37, that
they have homogenous topology and that they are easy to control 38.
The other interesting borderline case is the Grassland species food
web that with LCP-correlation of 0.42 is closer to non-LCP networks,
and this can motivate its paradoxical behaviour detected in Fig. 2c
(after 10% of random link removal, LCP-corr 5 0.41) and discussed
above.
On the other hand, the upper-bound case is represented by the air
transportation network, which shows a 0.99 LCP-corr (Fig. 5 left side,
American/Canadian flight map). We mined the literature to find an
explanation for the contradiction between the result obtained for the
air transportation and for the road transportation networks (Fig. 5
right side, LCP-corr ranges from 0 to 0.16). Guimera et al.39 provided
a possible answer, which we shall now cite: = …We find that the
worldwide air transportation network is a scale-free small-world
network. In contrast to the prediction of scale-free network models,
however, we find that the most connected cities are not necessarily
the most central, resulting in anomalous values of the centrality. We
demonstrate that these anomalies arise because of the multicommu-
nity structure of the network. We identify the communities in the air
transportation network and show that the community structure can-
not be explained solely based on geographical constraints and that
geopolitical considerations have to be taken into account. … ?.
Although Guimera et al. did not formalise any paradigm, we
recognise an ante litteram discovery of the LCP in their intuition
of the need for a new explanation (besides the scale-free and the
small-world paradigms) to characterise the topology of air trans-
portation networks more precisely. Meanwhile, the social (geopol-
itical) interpretation of the flight networks clarifies the mismatch
with the road networks, which are shaped more by geographic con-
straints, and further justifies our choice to allocate the flight map
among the social networks.
The conclusions of Guimera et al. - and the need to formalise them
in a paradigm such as LCP - appear clearer if interpreted in the light
shed by two theories recently posited, one by Bogun˜a´ et al.37 on the
navigability of complex networks, and the other by Liu et al. 38 on
the controllability of the same. Bogun˜a´ et al. illustrated the greedy-
routing of information in a network through an example of passenger
air-travel. They showed how greedy behaviour takes a passenger
from a small airport to larger hub airports, which significantly
reduces the distance to the destination (zoom-out coarse-grained
search), and how hubs are thus crucial for global delivery. Once a
hub near the destination is reached, hubs are not needed anymore
because a less-connected neighbouring airport can take the passen-
ger to the desired city (zoom-in fined-grained search). Therefore,
some particular non-hub nodes centred in local modules are fun-
damental for the local processing of the general function implemen-
ted on the network. On the other hand, Liu et al. found that low-
degree nodes (and, counter-intuitively, not hubs) play the most
important part in the full controllability of complex networks, and
this finding fits with Bogun˜a´’s, because hub nodes may be viewed as
collectors and distributors of information: if one of the near-destina-
tion hubs is unavailable, another one can compensate. They act as
intermediary relaxing points that avoid bottlenecks and direct data to
more important nodes (driver or processor nodes) that accomplish a
dedicated function within local modules, where they naturally
Figure 5 | LCP in real networks. Examples of LCP networks (left panel) and non-LCP networks (right panel). The LCP networks we found range from
LCP-corr 0.84 (C. elegans rostral ganglia neuro-synaptic connectome) to 0.99 (American/Canadian flight map). The networks in the center (Power Grid and
Grassland species food web) are borderline cases. The adjacency matrices of all the networks for which we computed LCP-corr are provided at the link in SI,
section IX. For licence information on the individual elements of this figure please see SI, section X.
www.nature.com/ scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1613 | DOI: 10.1038/srep01613 9