assume a position of centrality. Similar conclusions are discussed by
Lancichinetti et al. as well 36.
We also introduced the analysis of atomic-level networks. On the
right side of Fig. 5, we showed that many organic molecules (their
crystals, reticula and lattices) and secondary-biological structures
have a network topology that is non-LCP. In similar vein, we inves-
tigated the network topology in the tertiary-biological structures of
proteins: said structures are generated by various classes of non-
covalent interactions that occur between protein residues and deter-
mine the typical protein folding conformation. Residue interaction
networks (RINs) have recently been used to describe the protein
three-dimensional structure as a graph, where nodes represent resi-
dues and edges physico-chemical interactions, e.g. hydrogen bonds
or van der Waals contacts 40. Various topological properties have
been calculated over RINs and have been correlated with differing
aspects of protein structure and function 40. We found that both the
hydrogen bond network of human glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4,
LCP-corr 5 0.90) and the van der Waals contact network of human
triosephosphateisomerase (TIM barrel, LCP-corr 5 0.88) - which
were the only RINs available to use 40 - are LCP (Fig. 5 right side,
and SI, section IX). Consequently, we envisage that this finding
might be extended beyond the examples here quoted, to confirm that
the LCP-state detected within tridimensional-protein conformations
could be a generic property of some tertiary-biological structures.
The LCP in idealised networks. LCP accounts for community-based
structure in the topology of complex networks, and extends pre-
sent knowledge to a degree that, along with the small-world and
preferential-attachment paradigms, may enhance our understand-
ing of systems of interacting units, their evolution and self-
organisation. The need for, and value of, such a novel paradigm
are further investigated in the following examples, which deal with
referential idealised models. The networks in Fig. 6a are two diverse
random regular graphs (random graphs for which each node has the
same degree) with the same number of nodes. The BA paradigm
(which is based on power-law node distribution) does not detect
any difference between these two networks, since the degree distri-
bution of a random regular graph corresponds to a single value that is
also the fixed node degree. Even the WS paradigm (small-world)
does not detect any difference, since the two networks have iden-
tical clustering coefficients and characteristic path lengths. This is
further proof that, as clarified in the original article2, the small-world
paradigm is inapplicable to the detection of topological changes that
emerge exclusively at a local structural level in the network. Bogun˜a´
et al. 37 showed, firstly, that behind each network there is a hidden
metric space that is closely related to the network topology and,
secondly, that global mapping may be inferred from local dis-
tances. In a way, the same principle is exploited by Isomap 41,a
landmark algorithm for embedding that was mainly designed to
visualise the hidden structure of a dataset or of a network in a bi-
dimensional space. Surprisingly, the embedding in two dimensions
by Isomap suggests substantial divergence between the hidden
metric spaces of the two random regular networks, as well as a
likewise substantial difference in the local topology (Fig. 6a). The
paradigm we propose is the only one that clearly identifies this
topological difference within the hidden metric space of the two
networks (Fig. 6a). The LCP-correlation is 0.37 for the network on
the left, which consists of only two clusters, while for the second
network, which consists of three clusters, the LCP-correlation is, as
expected, higher (LCP-corr 5 0.71, Fig. 6a on the right side).
Idealised networks are very useful to test the generality of a hypo-
thesis in different configurations, which in turn are easily generated
artificially through a known model and controlled by certain para-
meters2. Such networks are particularly crucial to investigations into
the behaviour of a given measurement around a critical region that
hosts a transition between differing macroscopical states of the
system. We simulated differing ER networks by varying the two
parameters used in the model G(n, p), namely network size (number
of nodes n) and edge probability (each edge is included in the graph
with probability p independent from every other edge). We per-
formed 100 realizations for each combination of model parameters
and plotted in Fig. 6b the mean (displayed in the centre) and the
standard deviation (displayed on the right) of the LCP-correlation
values computed for the 100 network realizations. In their original
1960 paper 1, Erdo˝s and Re´nyi mathematically described the beha-
viour of G(n, p) at various values of p. One of their main conclusions
was that ln nðÞ
n represents a critical threshold for the connectedness of
G(n, p). In particular, they proved that: i) If pv 1{eðÞ ln nðÞ
n then a
graph in G(n, p) will be disconnected because it certainly contains
several isolated vertices (which implies the loss of local network
communities); ii) if pw 1zeðÞ ln nðÞ
n then a graph in G(n, p) will
be most likely connected (which implies the preservation of local
network communities). Interestingly, we discovered that the theor-
etical transition region (Fig. 6b, plot on the left) is accurately detected
and visualised by the LCP-correlation (Fig. 6b, in the centre and on
the right) in our experiments. From the mean of the LCP-correlation
values, as plotted in the centre of Fig. 6b, we discovered that the
majority of all possible generable ER models strongly follow the
LCP (black area above the critical region). The necessarily small
percentage of non-LCP models appear in the white area under the
critical region. This result confirms that under the critical region,
several isolated vertices appear in the graph, while above the critical
region a topology characterised by several community structures
begins to emerge. Meanwhile, prompted by standard deviation ana-
lysis (Fig. 6b on the right) we learn that the generation of graphs with
intermediate values for LCP-correlation occurs very rarely and is
only possible when it coincides with the instability expressed in the
critical transition region (dark region in the plot); in the other zones
(white part of the plot), standard deviation is close to zero and the
LCP-correlation value is very stable.
In conclusion, this simulation suggests that the generation of: i) ER
networks with LCP-corr higher than 0.80 is very frequent; ii) ER
networks with LCP-corr close to 0 is not frequent; iii) ER networks
with intermediate LCP-corr is very infrequent. These findings are in
line with the ones we obtained for real networks, where the iden-
tification of LCP networks was very easy (Fig. 5b, left side), both at
diverse physical levels and in differing domains (biological, social,
atomic), while the identification of non-LCP networks was difficult
and their occurrence was almost exclusively detected at the atomic
level (Fig. 5b, right side). Interestingly, except for the power grid
(which showed 0.78 LCP-corr, a borderline value) and few others,
real networks with intermediate levels of LCP-correlation were not
identified.
Taken together, these discoveries are important steps towards the
answer to the second question formalised in the introduction.
Discussion
The third question posed in the introduction conjectures a sort of
generalised systemic parallelism between the occurrence of certain
topological properties (as formalised in a paradigm) and the rel-
evance of some physical properties. In effect, LCP networks (Fig. 5
left side) are related to dynamic and heterogeneous systems that are
characterised by weak interactions 42 (relatively expensive or rela-
tively strong) that in turn facilitate network evolution and remod-
elling; these are typical features of social and biological systems as
well as, at the atomic level, of tertiary protein structures. According to
Liu et al.38, it should be more difficult to achieve full control of these
systems by manipulating a few network driver-nodes. In contrast,
non-LCP networks (Fig. 5 right side) characterise steady and homo-
geneous systems that are assembled through strong (often quite
www.nature.com/ scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1613 | DOI: 10.1038/srep01613 10