idea. Table 1 provides the formula of the considered classical indices
and their respective CAR-based variations, for details on their
derivation please refer to SI section IIID, where we also provide a
demonstration, which, under the assumption of very sparse net-
works, proves that CAR and CAA give the same ranking, evidence
that we confirm also experimentally by simulations on real networks
(SI section IIID and Fig. S2).
Link-prediction in brain connectomes . To test the performance of
CAR’s indices against the classical indices, we propose an innovative
benchmark problem that originates from the neurosciences. The
notion of connectome 16 suggests that the brain circuitry can be
outlined as a network of neurons connected by links, which are
synapses. Several neuroscientific studies have demonstrated that
certain forms of learning consist of synaptic modifications 17, while
the number of neurons remains basically unaltered 18. A first
model of this process was proposed in 1949 by Hebb and subse-
quently used in Hopfield’s model of associative memory 18. The
Hebbian learning theory assumes that different engrams (memory
traces) are memorised by the differing neurons’ cohorts that are co-
activated within a given synaptic network. It is also termed cell-
assembly hypothesis 18, because these neuron-assemblies are shaped
during engram formation by a re-tuning of the strengths of all the
adjacent synapses extant in the network. Recent studies 18, however,
demonstrated that learning new motor or sensory tasks is associated
with the development of new and non-overlapping sets of persistent
synapses. Ziv et al. commented on these findings by suggesting that
synapse-assemblies, rather than cell-assemblies, might be viewed as
the elementary entities of stored memories18, which in turn amounts
to a link/community reinterpretation of learning and memory
processes in neuroplasticity. We thought to test this synapse-
assemblies hypothesis in a computational framework, where the
formation of new synapses during learning might also be
influenced by the local-synapse-communities extant in the net-
work. Consequently, we proposed to use the topological prediction
of new links in a brain-connectome to model the part of the growth
and remodelling process that is conditioned by the connectome
topology during synaptic formation.
Figs. 2a and 2b show the prediction power of CAR’s indices versus
that of the classical node-neighbourhood-based indices. We consid-
ered the first and (to date) only available in-vivo single neuron con-
nectome (obtained by means of in vivo two-photon calcium imaging
in combination with large-scale electron microscopy) that reports
mouse primary visual cortex (layers 1, 2/3 and upper 4) synaptic
connections between neurons 19. The evaluation was performed by
destroying uniformly at random a certain percentage of synapses and
by re-predicting them with the indices’ ranking (details are in the
Methods section and in the SI, section IV). CAR’s indices proved to
be the best methods and performed significantly better (p-value ,
0.05) than the classical node-based models such as CN in the destruc-
tion and re-prediction of up to 50% of the original connectome
synapses (Fig. 2a–b). Interestingly, the 50% deletion level seems to
be a critical value. Synaptic deletion beyond this limit induced a
strong reduction in performance in all indices; nevertheless CPA
Figure 1 | CAR index. When a link or a node directly interacts with a seed node, it belongs to the first-level-neighbourhood and conveys first-level
topological information. Conversely, a link or a node that interacts with the first-level-neighbourhood conveys second-level information. Secon d-level
information is valuable and its use can significantly improve topological link-prediction, but unfortunately it is also very noisy, and for this rea son
difficult to integrate with the first-level information. CAR is designed to capture and filter meaningful second-level information by exploiting common-
first-neighbours. The topological information conveyed by the internal links between common-first-neighbours is valuable second-level informa tion.
Indeed, the more the common-first-neighbours reciprocally interact, the more they represent a local-community, which in turn encompasses the two
seed nodes and thus increases their candidate-link likelihood. Here we introduce the idea that the likelihood of a candidate-link is a function of both the
number of common-first-neighbours (as in the CN index) and of the number of links between them (local-community links), as expressed in the formula
of CAR. The two explicative examples clarify how CAR increases discriminative resolution between candidate-links with the same number of common-
first-neighbours.
www.nature.com/ scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1613 | DOI: 10.1038/srep01613 3