expensive) interactions, difficult to erase. Given their homogenous
structure, such systems should be easier to control 38. This argument
is particularly valid for the power grid, which is not densely con-
nected (network density is proven to increase controllability), but
whose topology is homogeneous enough to be easily controllable38 -a
required specification in human-engineered networks.
The LCP architecture facilitates not only the rapid delivery of
information across the various network modules, but also the local
processing. On the other hand, the non-LCP architecture is more
useful for processes where: i) the storage of information (or energy) is
at least as important as its delivery; ii) the cost of creating new inter-
actions is excessive; iii) the creation of a redundant and densely
connected system is strategically inadvisable. An emblematic
example is the road networks, for which the money and time costs
of creating additional roads are very high, and in which a community
of strongly connected and crowded links resembles an impractical
labyrinth.
While the small-world-paradigm treated the main effect of re-
modelling in real networks, and the scale-free-paradigm offered an
innovative view of network growth in terms of node-preferential-
attachment, the LCP is a first attempt to advance a link/community-
based-interpretation of the epitopological learning component that
appears in many cognitive, social and evolutionary processes.
Methods
Link removal and re-prediction in connectomes, social and ecological networks. A
specific amount of synapses, equal to 10% of the total in the mouse connectome, was
destroyed uniformly at random. This process was repeated 1000 times, and we
generated 1000 diverse and random sparsified connectome topologies with 10% less
synapses with respect to the original connectome. Following the same procedure we
generated 1000 diverse and random sparsified topologies for each sparsification level,
ranging the amount of removed synapses from 10% to 90% of the original, according
to the following progressive levels of sparsification: 10%, 20%, 30%, …, 90% (see
Fig. 2a). The link-prediction techniques (see Table 1), along with a random predictor,
were applied to the diverse connectome topologies, and a list of candidate interactions
sorted by likelihood score was obtained for each sparsified connectome configuration.
The proportion of top-ranked candidate interactions that at each sparsification level
matched the removed synapses - which is a measure of precision - was used to assess
the performance in prediction. Since this process was repeated 1000 times for each
sparsification level, in practise mean precision and standard error were considered for
each stage. To characterise the deviation of each predictor from randomness, we
transformed the indices’ mean precisions at each sparsification level into decibels as:
10: log10
PrecisionPrediction Technique
PrecisionRandom Predictor
taking the mean performance of the random
predictor as a reference. This transformed measure was named prediction power. The
predictive power, measured at different sparsification levels, generated a prediction
power curve (see Fig. 2a), and the area under this curve (AUPPC) summarised the
power of each predictor. Since deletion of more than 50% synapses caused node
isolation and the disappearance of local communities, to have a fair comparison, the
AUPPC in Fig. 2B was computed considering only up to 50% of links removed in the
Mouse Connectome. More details on this part are given in SI, section IV.
To further test the link-prediction power of classical and CAR-based indices, we
inspected their performance over 8 different networks (see Fig. 2C). Their prediction
power was tested when only 10% of the network links were destroyed, in order to be
sure that the community structure of the analysed networks was preserved, and thus
to guarantee a fair comparison between all different predictors. Finally, we performed
a permutation test with 1000 resampling realizations, to assess whether the mean
prediction power of the CAR-based indices was significantly different and possibly
higher than the mean prediction power of the classical indices; a p-value threshold of
0.05 was considered statistically significant (see SI, section IV).
Figure 6 | LCP in idealised networks. (a) Isomap embedding of two random regular graphs (Nodes5 10, Degree 5 5) with equal clustering coefficients
(Cp) and characteristic path lengths (Lp) but different LCP-correlation. Neither the BA nor the WS paradigm were able to explain the topological
difference between these two random regular graphs, which share the same node numbers and the same node degree. The paradigm we propose is the only
one that, consistent with Isomap embedding, clearly highlights the community organisation diversity present in the hidden metric spaces of the two
networks. (b) Testing the LCP-correlation for differing Erdo˝s–Re´nyi random graphs G(n,p) by varying the number of nodes n (from 10 to 500, step 10)
and the edge probabilityp (from 0.01 to 0.99, step 0.02). For each combination(n,p) the LCP-correlation was evaluated 100 times for calculation of mean
and standard deviation. The theoretical critical region computed by Erdo˝s and Re´nyi in their model (plot on the left) is strikingly detectable both by the
mean (plot in the centre ) and by the standard-deviation ( plot on the right ) LCP-correlation.
www.nature.com/ scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1613 | DOI: 10.1038/srep01613 11