to be correctly predicted if the association between the two linked
proteins has relevance in the Gene Ontology (GO) categories
(Methods sections and SI, section V). Typically, a level of precision
(on the basis of significant association in GO) is recursively evaluated
for sets of increasing size of the best first-ranked candidate
interactions (Methods section and SI, section V). A precision curve
is obtained, and the area under this curve (AUP) is a measure of
performance. Yeast networks are the preferred benchmark, because
of the large amount of information available for yeast in terms of
both detected interactions and GO associations 15,29. We accordingly
re-analysed three different, independently produced, yeast networks
that had been used in previous studies for performance testing (SI,
sections V; and Table S3 in section IX). CAR and CAR-based indices
not only substantially outperformed the other methods in the three
networks (they are the only indices to attain AUP always equal or
higher than 0.85, Fig. 3b–d), but also proved to be the most efficient,
in that it simultaneously provided consistent robustness (Fig. 3e,f
and SI Table S1) and the lowest maximum-computational time
(SI Table S1).
We besides investigated the extent to which the topological link-
prediction could be practically useful. To this end, we proposed an
in-silico validation (SI, section VI), and tested the 100 best ranked
interactions, both for CAR and for FSW (reference method for the
bio-inspired indices), with the STRING database35. Considered to be
the most complete and reliable database of protein-protein interac-
tions (PPIs), STRING integrates multiple sources of information and
provides a confidence score for each interaction 35. Once again, CAR
confirmed the benefit of using a link/community strategy, and per-
formed impressively during this validation test, both in each single
network evaluation (SI, section VI, Fig. S4a-c) and in the general
evaluation of robustness (Fig. 3f).
Summarizing, we observe that in general using the CAR-trick to
convert the classical methods to the new link-community perspec-
tive, generates in several complex networks a significant increase in
link prediction performance, suggesting that a new family of com-
munity-based link predictors is here proposed. In addition, we notice
that whenever the community structure of the network (if present) is
preserved, it can be exploited to achieve more accurate predictions
using the new CAR-based family of link predictors.
The local community paradigm (LCP) in real networks . A
necessary condition for the application of CAR’s indices is that,
during its growth, the network in question evolves in accordance
with a general process, one of whose distinctive features is the
development of diverse, overlapping and hierarchically organised
local-communities15. We defined this form of topological self-
organisation as a local-community-paradigm (LCP) , and we there-
fore propose the LCP-decomposition-plot (LCP-DP) to visualise and
investigate the effect of LCP on network topology. The LCP-DP is a
form of network-decomposition because each real link in the
network is plotted in a bi-dimensional space according both to its
number of CNs (reported on the x-axis) and to the respective number
of LCLs (number of links between the common-first-neighbours,
reported on the y-axis). More specifically, given that the number of
LCL is a squared function of the CNs (SI, section VIII), we found it
more convenient to report the square root of LCL on the y-axis, so as
to linearize the visualisation. The result of this decomposition is a
plot that offers a link-based visualisation of the analysed network
and provides information on the presence and size of its local-
communities.
Fig. 4a shows the LCP-DP for the three previously employed yeast
PPI networks. Surprisingly, we discovered that Network3 differs
from the other two, whose LCP-DP patterns resemble each other
(Fig 4a). In particular, the maximal local-community size for
Network3 is around 20 CNs, while for the other two networks the
maximal local-community size is about 60 CNs. Considering that all
the networks have a comparable number of nodes and links, and that
the maximal size of local-communities in Network3 is 1/3 of that in
the other networks, we can conclude that Network3 is more strongly
characterised by small-local-communities. The fact that multiple
small-local-communities in a large and sparse network most prob-
ably do not overlap with each other explains why all the indices
(CAR-based, classical and bio-inspired) performed in a comparable
manner and with better results in Network3 (Fig. 3d) than in the
other two networks (Fig. 3b–c), where instead the CAR-based per-
formed significantly better than the others. Following a similar
rationale, we observe that the C. elegans connectome (Fig. 4b, left
panel), although larger (more nodes) and sparser (less links) than the
Macaque connectome (Fig. 4b, right panel), is more strongly char-
acterised by small-local-communities (Fig. 4b, left panel), and this
explains why the performances of the CAR-based and classical in-
dices were not significantly different, and were overall higher in this
connectome than in the others (almost all the indices were between
12.5 and 13.5 dB, Fig. 2c). From the topological similarity between
Network3 and the C. elegans connetome, evidenced by using the
LCP-DP, we can now infer that a very sparse and clustered network
topology, characterised by the presence of multiple small-local-
communities that do not overlap with each other, improves link
prediction in general and minimise the difference between CAR-
based and classical indices. Conversely, in the extreme and opposite
case of very densely connected networks, the occurrence of large and
indistinct communities - which most likely overlap reciprocally and
envelop the small-local-communities - erases the community dis-
tinction that is fundamental for the efficiency of CAR and of predic-
tion methods in general. This is easily demonstrable because the
more a network tends to the ideal case of a fully-connected network,
the more it converges towards a unique and large single-community.
On the other hand, in Fig. 4c we clearly demonstrate that when we
randomly sparsify the networks in question (sparsification is a pro-
cedure that enables the performance testing in relation to unpredict-
able random variations in the original network topologies) CAR,
whenever the network community structure is preserved, is more
efficient and robust than the other indices in prediction of candidate
protein interactions (for details on this computational experiment
refer to SI, section VII).
A second discovery, which emerges from the LCP-DP, is the
strong correlation between the two variables CN and LCL, which
we call the LCP-correlation (LCP-corr) , and which might be inter-
preted as a typical feature of LCP networks (Fig. 4a–b). More spe-
cifically, the LCP-correlation is defined as the Pearson-correlation
coefficient between the variables CN and LCL as plotted in the LCP-
DP (computation details are in SI, section VIII). Looking at the curve
of average LCP-correlation values - computed for the Mouse con-
nectome configurations, in the randomly destroyed synapses experi-
ment of Fig. 2a – we observe that the LCP-correlation decreases
significantly between 10% (LCP-corr 5 0.60) and 20% (LCP-corr
5 0.31) of removed synapses, and this is a confirmation that the
choice to focus our attention on the comparison of the predictors
when 10% only of the links are randomly removed, was a correct
procedure to preserve the community structure. In fact the average
LCP-correlation values of the 8 partially destroyed complex net-
works adopted in Fig. 2c are always higher (except for the
Grassland web) than LCP-corr 5 0.5. On the other hand, also the
examples provided in Fig. 4a (Network1 has LCP-corr 5 0.92;
Network2 has LCP-corr 5 0.95; Network3 has LCP-corr 5 0.90)
might lead one to suspect that large LCP-correlation coefficients are
invariably associated with the occurrence of LCP, and small LCP-
correlation coefficients with LCP’s non-occurrence. Therefore, to
investigate the extent to which this hypothesis is generally valid,
we considered a total of 45 networks from differing fields (15 bio-
logical, 10 social, 10 atomic, 1 power grid, 9 roadmaps - see SI, section
IX).
www.nature.com/ scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1613 | DOI: 10.1038/srep01613 6