link-prediction reflects the extent to which the evolution of a network
might be modelled on the basis of topological features intrinsic to the
network itself7,8.
Here, we inspect three central questions that stem naturally from
the state of the art: 1) how can the prediction of new links on the
exclusive basis of network topology (topological link-prediction) be
improved? 2) is it possible to define a network paradigm that enables
the prediction of new links in many real networks, on the assumption
that their topologies are shaped in accordance with a single, general
link-growing process (as postulated in the paradigm)? 3) is it possible
to conjecture any connection between a topological network para-
digm and a class of physical systems?
Results
A local community approach to link-prediction . A myriad of
complicated techniques for topological link-prediction with two or
more parameters to tune have been proposed 7,9,10, even inspired by
concepts that originate from statistical mechanics and theory of
disordered systems. Nevertheless, such elegant techniques are at
the moment mere proof of concepts rather than concrete methods
to apply on real problems. Apart from the problem to tune the
parameters in an unsupervised framework, the greatest obstacle is
their prohibitive computational time, which in practice relegates
their application to toy networks of very small dimensions (few
hundreds of nodes), in comparison to the giant networks used in
real problems. For these reasons, in order to answer the first question,
we preferred to focus our attention on efficient and parameter-free
Node-Neighbourhood-based approaches7, which are commonly
employed in both research and application, and whose design is
inspired by the main patterns characterising the topology of com-
plex networks 7,11. Node-Neighbourhood-based approaches assign a
likelihood score to each pair of non-connected nodes (candidate-
links), and then produce a ranked list in decreasing order to
‘advocate’ candidate interactions. The common neighbours (CN)
index11 is the progenitor of these methods and follows the natural
intuition that the likelihood that two nodes x and y interact increases
if their sets of first-node-neighbours C xðÞ and C yðÞ overlap
substantially: CN~ C xðÞ T C yðÞðÞjj . The other indices are often a
variation or generalisation of CN 7: Jaccard’s index (JC) is a
normalisation of CN 12, Adamic & Adar (AA) 13 and Resource
Allocation (RA) 14 give more importance to CNs with low degree,
while Preferential Attachment (PA) 11 is the degree product of
nodes x and y (for the formulae see Table 1 and for details see
Supplementary Information (SI) section IIIA). In contrast to the
existing methodologies, which are focused on groups of common
nodes and their node neighbours, we here embrace a strategic shift
from nodes to links that represents a new way to treat complex
networks15. In particular, Ahn et al. reconceived communities as
groups of links rather than as mere groups of nodes, and proposed
a link-based approach for graph-partition that outperforms node-
based techniques 15. However, the potential of the link/community
viewpoint is still largely unexplored, and we sensed that this strategy
might also be successful for the design of novel link-prediction
indices; our interest is to introduce a new philosophy in the formu-
lation of parameter-free/neighbourhood-based indices, advocating a
shift in perspective from nodes to links, and in particular from nodes
to community links.
The CAR index (see Fig. 1 for definition and examples, and SI
section IIID) stems from the fusion of the old node-based and new
link-based perspectives. CAR suggests that two nodes are more likely
to link together if their common-first-neighbours are members of a
strongly inner-linked cohort, named a local-community (LC), and
the LC’s internal links are called local-community-links (LCL, see
Fig. 1). A consequence of this formulation is that, in respect to CN,
CAR offers more discriminative resolution between candidate-links
characterised by the same number of common-first-neighbours
(Fig. 1), and this boosting in resolution is clearly derived by the use
of the link/community perspective, which is introduced adopting
LCL in the CAR formula (for details see Fig. 1 and SI section IIID).
To demonstrate that the formulation of CAR is not a banal trick, but
the precise introduction of a link/community strategy in designing
neighbourhood-based indices, we propose for each of the above
mentioned classical methods a CAR-based variant. If LCL is seen as
an index enhancer, it can be plugged into PA, AA, RA and JC indices
so that these techniques also shift to the link/community perspective
and in the rest of the article we will extensively prove the value of this
Table 1 | Table of formulae for the classical and CAR-based neighbourhood techniques
Type Name of the Index Formulation
Classical Common Neighbours (CN) CN x ,yðÞ ~ C xðÞ T C yðÞjj ~ix ~iy
Preferential Attachment (PA) PA x ,yðÞ ~ C xðÞjj : C yðÞjj ~ ex zixðÞ : ey ziy
/C0/C1
~ex ey zex CN x ,yðÞ zey CN x ,yðÞ zCN x ,yðÞ 2
Adamic & Adar (AA) AA x ,yðÞ ~
X
s[C xðÞ
T
C yðÞ
1
log2 C sðÞjjðÞ
Resource Allocation (RA) RA x ,yðÞ ~
X
s[C xðÞ
T
C yðÞ
1
C sðÞjj
Jaccard (JC) JC x ,yðÞ ~ C xðÞ T C yðÞjj
C xðÞ T C yðÞjj ~ CN x ,yðÞ
C xÞ T C yðÞðjj
CAR-based CAR CAR x ,yðÞ ~CN x ,yðÞ :LCL x ,yðÞ ~CN x ,yðÞ : X
s[C xðÞ
T
C yðÞ
c sðÞjj
2
CPA CPA x ,yðÞ ~ex ey zex CAR x ,yðÞ zey CAR x ,yðÞ zCAR x ,yðÞ 2
CAA CAA x ,yðÞ ~
X
s[C xðÞ
T
C yðÞ
c sðÞjj
log2 C sðÞjjðÞ
CRA CRA x ,yðÞ ~
X
s[C xðÞ
T
C yðÞ
c sðÞjj
C sðÞjj
CJC CJC x ,yðÞ ~ CAR x ,yðÞ
C xðÞ T C yðÞjj
x and y are network nodes;s is a common neighbour node ofx and y; C xðÞ refers to the set of neighbours ofx; C xðÞjj refers to the cardinality of setC xðÞ , which is equivalent to the degree ofx; c(s) refers to the
sub-set of neighbours ofs that are also common neighbours ofx and y, thusc(s) is the local community degree ofs;e x refers to the external degree ofx, computed considering the neighbours ofx that are not
common neighbours ofx and y;i x refers to the internal degree ofx that is equivalent to the number of common neighbours shared byx and y. For the Matlab code to compute all the indices in the table see SI,
section IIID.
www.nature.com/ scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1613 | DOI: 10.1038/srep01613 2