(which is the CAR-based variant of PA) and PA were notably the
only indices whose prediction remained stable in the given condition
- with CPA performing also as the best index overall. This finding
suggests that for synaptic deletion greater than 50%, a significant
quantity of connectome nodes is also deleted causing network dis-
connection into different components and network clustering coeff-
icient reduction. The consequence is a general drop in performance
for all the non-PA based indices 20 that, as a result, assign a score of
zero to candidate links whose seed nodes are located in different
components. On the contrary PA formulation is based on the prod-
uct of the seed nodes’ degrees only, thus its performance is less affect-
ed. By definition, this result also corroborates the reliability of the
analysed connectome and of the experimental approach used to
detect it. Additionally, the result confirms that the design of our
computational experiment was correct, and illustrates, as expected,
that initial link-growth is dominated by a self-organising process of
node-preferential-attachment4.
Furthermore, we considered two different in-silico connectomes,
the Macaque cortical connectome and the C. elegans frontal ganglia
connectome, which previous studies had assembled in order to
merge partial information obtained from disparate literature and
database sources21. Here, in particular, we concentrated our attention
on the predictors’ performances when random deletion of only 10%
of links is applied, to ensure that the community structure (if present)
is still preserved, and in order to objectively compare the proposed
community-based indices versus the classical ones (details on the
procedures used for these and all the comparisons of Fig. 2c are in
the Methods section and in the SI, section IV). Although CAR’s
indices performed largely better than random predictors in these
two simulations too (Fig. 2c), their superiority over the classical
indices was diminished but still statistically significant in the
Macaque connectome, and comparable to the classical methods in
the C. elegans connectome. This finding may be due to: i) the unre-
liability and paucity of the two different connectomes, which do not
directly derive from in-vivo investigations; ii) the absence of suf-
ficient topological information that is generated by the neuroplasti-
city process of learning. In particular, the Macaque cortical
connectome (aka corticocortical network) is incomplete and differs
in anatomical scale: the links are long-range-projections between
cortical areas and subareas within one hemisphere of the primate
brain21. Although the C. elegans frontal ganglia connectome is recon-
structed at the synaptic level, in-silico merging causes it to be simi-
larly unreliable. Significantly, it has recently been emphasised how
published wiring diagrams for C. elegans are neither accurate nor
complete and self-consistent22. Nevertheless, the process of synaptic
formation (or, to be precise, at least that part of the process that
depends on connectome topology) between existing neurons seems
to be more accurately predicted by our local-community-based
models than by PA and the other classical neighbourhood-based
approaches, and this is the first substantial result we have obtained
for link-prediction in computational network biology. A straight-
forward implication of this finding might open up new avenues in
computational learning models, in which the Hebbian theory might
be complemented by an epitopological learning theory , whereby
engram formation stems from the growth of additional synapses
within local-communities of pre-existing synapses. A second
important implication is that our local-community-based interpreta-
tion of synaptic learning could also be a computational evidence to
support the recently proposed unifying hypothesis on the autistic
brain called Intense World Syndrome (IWS), which sustains that
the core pathology of the autistic brain is hyper-reactivity and
hyper-plasticity of local neuronal circuits 23. Markram et al. advocate
that such excessive neuronal processing and plasticity in circum-
scribed circuits lead to excessive neuronal learning: hyper-
perception, hyper-attention, and hyper-memory, which may lie at
the heart of most autistic symptoms 23. Thus, we speculate that our
local-community-based interpretation of synaptic learning might be
also adopted as part of a computational model to simulate some of
the basic mechanisms that are assumed by the IWS to explain how
the autistic person is an individual with far above average capabilities
(due to enhanced perception, attention and memory) 23.
Link-prediction in social and ecological networks . The CAR’s
indices were in general significantly better than classical ones also
when applied to diverse kinds of complex networks such as the
human/animal social networks (Fig. 2c). Only the food webs repre-
sented a case apart. For the food web of Tuesday Lake (excluding the
performance of PA) the CAR-based indices were the only ones that
performed better than random, and in general significantly better
than the classical indices. For the food web of Grassland species
(excluding the performance of JC) we registered a paradoxical
behaviour, since it is the only network where the performance of
classical methods is significantly better than CAR-based indices
(the topological motivation of this result will be further investi-
gated in the next section). There is, nevertheless, an explanation
for these opposite behaviours based on the structure, characteris-
tics and members of these two ecosystems. While the Tuesday
Lake is regarded as one of the most complete and organised webs
in the field of ecology 24,25, the Grassland web is considered highly
unsaturated26. Moreover, the Grassland web has a linear structure
that in ecology is known as the cascade model: a serial trophic
organisation, where the bigger organism eats the smaller. In
contrast, the Tuesday Lake web has a pyramidal organisation that
differs from the cascade model in the distribution of links between
basal, intermediate, and top communities of species 25. Thus, the
Grassland web has a highly sparse and almost linear connectivity,
which makes it hard for local communities to emerge; on the
contrary, the Tuesday Lake web has a more densely connected and
organised structure, which is actually related with the presence of
local communities at different levels of the pyramidal organization.
As a further investigation, we compared CAR’s indices with
two sophisticated statistical inference techniques : the Hierarchical
Random Graph 27 and the Stochastic Block Model 28 - see SI section
IIIC for details. The comparison followed the same procedure
showed in Fig. 2c, and we did not detect any remarkable increase
in performance of these advanced algorithms in comparison to the
family of CAR-based community indices (see SI, Fig. S1). Details on
the methods and results of this last comparison are in SI, section IV.
Link-prediction in protein interactomes . A second aspect of the
link-prediction problem regards the inference of missing interac-
tions from an observed network 7. In varying disciplines, a network
is constructed on the basis of experiments, and for at least two
reasons some links might not be observable: i) by nature, the links
are not directly detectable; ii) the experiments and/or the execution
time are very expensive. The problem of observability affects systems
biology, a discipline in which the topological prediction of novel
interactions in protein networks (interactomes) is particularly
useful, especially and specifically when other types of information,
such as biological prior knowledge, are not available 29. This problem
differs from the original formulation (link-prediction in network
evolution over time) discussed above, and the class of link-
prediction indices (named bio-inspired indices , SI, section IIIB)
currently employed in systems biology derives from methods
invented to infer similar attributes between adjacent protein
nodes29: the Interaction Generality (IG1) Index 30 originates from
phenomenological evidences in experimental protein interaction
detection; the Czekanowski-Dice Dissimilarity (CDD, as well as its
adjusted version ACDD) 31,32 and the Functional Similarity Weight
(FSW)33 stem from methods for protein functional prediction in
interactomes; and ISOMAP (ISO) 29,34 is based on high-dimensional
properties and embedding of protein networks. The strategy used for
evaluation differs too29, and a candidate protein interaction is judged
www.nature.com/ scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1613 | DOI: 10.1038/srep01613 5