From link-prediction in brain
connectomes and protein interactomes to
the local-community-paradigm in
complex networks
Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci 1,2*, Gregorio Alanis-Lobato 1,2* & Timothy Ravasi 1,2
1Integrative Systems Biology Laboratory, Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering Division, Computer, Electrical and
Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division, Computational Bioscience Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science
and Technology (KAUST), Ibn Al Haytham Bldg. 2, Level 4, Thuwal 23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,2Division of Medical
Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA.
Growth and remodelling impact the network topology of complex systems, yet a general theory explaining
how new links arise between existing nodes has been lacking, and little is known about the topological
properties that facilitate link-prediction. Here we investigate the extent to which the connectivity evolution
of a network might be predicted by mere topological features. We show how a link/community-based
strategy triggers substantial prediction improvements because it accounts for the singular topology of
several real networks organised in multiple local communities - a tendency here named local-community-
paradigm (LCP). We observe that LCP networks are mainly formed by weak interactions and characterise
heterogeneous and dynamic systems that use self-organisation as a major adaptation strategy. These systems
seem designed for global delivery of information and processing via multiple local modules. Conversely,
non-LCP networks have steady architectures formed by strong interactions, and seem designed for systems
in which information/energy storage is crucial.
D
igging into the properties of complex networks is fundamental for the definition of general paradigms of
complex systems, in which complexity is distinctively generated by the topological integration of many
interacting parts. The Erdo˝s–Re´nyi (ER) model, was proposed in 1959 to analyse an idealised random
network, as characterised by a fixed number of nodes and by a uniform probability that two nodes are randomly
connected1. Nearly four decades later, in 1998, Watts and Strogatz (WS) deepened our insight into the relation-
ship between random processes and the rise of topological properties in real networks 2. The WS model (also
named small-world network) untangled how regular networks - with a fixed number of nodes and edges - react if
an increasing number of edges are randomly rewired with uniform probability 2. A WS network presents signifi-
cantly higher clustering and comparable mean geodesic distance than a random graph of the same size and mean
node-degree2. In particular, the mean geodesic distance in a WS network is ‘small’ relative to the network size - at
most a logarithmic function of the total number of nodes in the network 3 - and we now know that several real
networks follow this paradigm.
Only one year later, while investigating the topological evolution of real networks, Baraba ´si and Albert (BA)
shed new light on complex network processes 4. Voicing the assumption of an open network , the BA model
(consistent with a previous study of de Solla Price 5 on scientific citation networks) explained how the scale-
invariance of many real networks originates from a specific growth process, in which a new node tends with
higher probability to be linked to those nodes (network hubs) that already have a large number of neighbours.
This paradigm, named preferential attachment (PA)4, together with the underlying idea of popularity6 is just one
facet of node attractiveness in growing networks, another important aspect being similarity6.
However, topological evolution when exclusively new links are added to the network has yet to be congruously
formalised, and it connects with a practical and front-line issue, namely the link-prediction problem 7. Many
applications have to predict new links in large and sparse complex networks merely with the knowledge of
network topology, and new solutions could impact both science and engineering positively. Meanwhile,
SUBJECT AREAS:
NETWORK TOPOLOGY
NETWORK MODELS
COMPLEX NETWORKS
COMPLEXITY
Received
4 February 2013
Accepted
20 February 2013
Published
8 April 2013
Correspondence and
requests for materials
should be addressed to
C.V.C. (kalokagathos.
agon@gmail.com) or
T.R. (timothy.ravasi@
kaust.edu.sa)
* These authors
contributed equally to
this work.
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1613 | DOI: 10.1038/srep01613 1