As evidenced in Fig. 5, where we juxtapose a few paradigmatic
examples, the scenery is more intriguing than we had expected: we
found that the region of LCP-correlations between 0.8 and 0.4 repre-
sents a threshold (a sort of intermediate region ) that distinguishes
networks that are characterised by LCP from those that are not. We
want to acknowledge that also Lancichinetti et al. 36 went close to the
formalisation of the LCP paradigm; and the observation of the dicho-
tomy between LCP and non-LCP networks. In fact, they provided a
systematic empirical analysis of the statistical properties of com-
munities in diverse types of large complex networks36, and evidenced
Figure 4 | LCP-DP, LCP-correlation and sparsification-experiment on PPIs. (a) Using the LCP-DP for investigation of the network topology and for
visualization of the LCP-correlation in protein interactomes. (b) Using the LCP-DP for investigation of the network topology and for visualizationof the
LCP-correlation in brain connectomes. (c) Testing the prediction robustness of CAR and the other indices during PPI network sparsification by random
link deletion. For each point 10 network realizations are computed, and the average AUP with standard-error for each index (computed with the same
procedure as that used for Fig. 3b-d) is reported. The random deletion adopted progressive levels (10%, 20%, and so forth, until network connectivitywas
lost) of the links in the original network. By varying the level of sparsification, we produced a curve of average-AUP values, so that the area under this curve
became a volume. On the basis of normalised AUP, we were able to compute what we called ‘volume’ under the precision curve (VUP). VUP is an
advanced performance measure in the sense that it accounts both for random variations in the original network topology and for differing levels of
sparsification. Isomap (ISO), which is the only embedding-based method, is not plotted for reasons of display clarity, but its VUP is reported.
www.nature.com/ scientificreports
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS | 3 : 1613 | DOI: 10.1038/srep01613 8