of the nonlinear layers in our models, we remove the nonlinear layers from both OCN and OCNP,
yielding OCN-Linear and OCNP-Linear, respectively. To verify that employing theMPNN-then-SF
paradigm better addresses the deficiencies mentioned earlier, we construct two variants utilizing
theSF-and-MPNNframework. Finally, when incorporating 3-hop CNs, the models are referred
to as OCN-3 and OCNP-3. When we use SPD-based higher-order common neighbors, we obtain
OCN-SPD and OCNP-SPD.
Beyond thoroughly verifying the significant role of each component in our models, an intriguing
experimental observation is that removing the nonlinear layers does not lead to a drastic performance
drop, except for ogbl-ppa, where performance collapses entirely. While the overall performance gap
on smaller-scale graph datasets remains relatively minor, it is important to highlight that OCN and
OCNP are originally designed to achieve substantial improvements on large-scale graphs, whereas
their benefits on smaller graphs are naturally less pronounced. This is likely because extensively
leveraging high-order CNs may introduce more uninformative information in smaller-scale graphs.
Furthermore, incorporating 3-hop CNs not only imposes a substantial increase in computational cost
and time but also contributes to greater instability in model performance. This instability manifests as
significant oscillations in the loss curve, which could potentially stem from the increased norm of the
model. MPNN may still implicitly learn information from higher-order neighbors. Using SPD-based
higher-order common neighbors also results in a performance decline, as we have analyzed, due to
information loss.
7.3 Scalability
BUDDY OCNOCN OCNPOCNPNCNNCN NCNCNCNCGAEGAESEALSEAL Neo-GNNNeo-GNN
Figure 5: Inference time and GPU memory on
ogbl-collab. The measured process includes pre-
processing and predicting one batch of test links.
As shown in Appendix I, the relation between time
yand batch sizetisy=B+Ct.
We compare the inference time and GPU mem-
ory usage on the ogbl-collab dataset in Fig-
ure 5. Both OCN and NCN exhibit similar com-
putational overhead, as they only need to run
the MPNN model once. However, in contrast,
SEAL shows a significantly higher computa-
tional overhead, particularly as the batch size
increases. This is because SEAL needs to rerun
the MPNN model for each individual target link,
which leads to a substantial increase in inference
time with larger batch sizes. When it comes to
GPU memory consumption, OCN generally re-
quires more memory than NCN. OCNP tends
to outperform OCN in both inference speed and
memory consumption.
We also conducted similar tests on a variety of other datasets. The results are shown in Figure 9.
We observe patterns that are quite similar to the ones seen in the ogbl-collab dataset, as presented
in Figure 5. Specifically, both OCN and OCNP generally show better scalability than Neo-GNN,
handling larger datasets more efficiently. On the other hand, SEAL continues to demonstrate the
poorest scalability among the models tested. In terms of memory usage, the overhead of OCN is
either comparable to or slightly higher than that of NCN, depending on the dataset.
8 Conclusion
We propose a novel method calledOCNfor the link prediction task and effectively alleviates
two key issues.OCNdemonstrates significant performance improvements across multiple datasets.
Furthermore, to further reduce the time complexity ofOCN, we introduceOCNP. The work presented
in this study offers a new perspective on the link prediction task and provides valuable insights for
future research on handling higher-order neighborhood information in large-scale graphs.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2022ZD0160300) and the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (62276003).
10