The first problem isredundancy: different-order common neighbors of the same node pair may
overlap significantly. A node can be a common neighbor and a higher-order common neighbor of
some node pair at the same time, as the path or walk connecting them may not be unique. This
overlap makes higher-order CNs less informative when common neighbors are already used.
The second problem isover-smoothing. In the context of node classification problems [Oono
and Suzuki, 2020], over-smoothing describes the phenomenon that, as the number of GNN layers
increases, all nodes have similar representations because their neighborhoods become more and more
similar. Here, over-smoothing means that, as the order of common neighbors increases, a node can
become a high-order CN for more and more node pairs simultaneously. When the path/walk length is
sufficiently large, the high-order common neighbors of a node pair will encompass the entire graph.
At this time, aggregating the features/embeddings of the high-order common neighbors makes every
node pair have similar pairwise representations, leading to over-smoothing in the context of pairwise
representation learning.
Both issues hinder the effective utilization of higher-order common neighbors, thereby limiting the
learning of complex pairwise structures and preventing state-of-the-art link prediction models from
achieving optimal performance. For example, Wang et al. [2024] found that utilizing only first-order
common neighbors led to the best performance in their models. To address these two problems, we
propose two techniques:coefficient orthogonalizationandpath-based normalization, respectively.
Forcoefficient orthogonalization, which solves redundancy, we remove the linear correlation
between the coefficients of different-order common neighbors. For instance, given a pair of nodes in a
graph with n nodes, the coefficient indicating whether each node participates in some order of common
neighbors of this node pair becomes a vector ∈R n. We use theGram-Schmidt orthogonalization
process toeliminate the correlation between the coefficient vectors of different-order common
neighbors, so that models can better leverage information from higher-order CNs. The coefficients
can be binary (0 or 1) to indicate whether a node is a common neighbor, or functions of node degrees
as used in [Yun et al., 2021], or the number of walks of a certain length connecting the two target nodes
in which the node participates, as used in this work. With coefficient orthogonalization, our model
significantly outperforms previous link prediction models using common neighbors. Furthermore,
to accelerate the orthogonalization process, we propose apolynomial trick, which achieves similar
performance to precise orthogonalization while eliminating the extra computational overhead.
Forpath-based normalization, which addresses over-smoothing, wedivide the coefficient of each
node by the number of k-hop walksin which it participates. The intuition behind the normalization
is that when a node participates in a large number of walks, it will more frequently appear in the
common neighbors of other node pairs, which causes the features of different links to become similar,
leading to over-smoothing. Notably, when the path or walk has a length of 1, the path count reduces to
the node degree, and our normalized CNdegenerates to a famous link prediction heuristic, Resource
Allocation[Zhou et al., 2009]. To theoretically analyze path-based normalization, we use a random
graph model and prove that, with the normalization, k-hop CNs lead to a strictly decreasing upper
bound of the proximity of positive node pairs (real links) with the increasing of k, while without
the normalization, high-order CNs do not decrease the proximity no matter how large k is used.
This result justifies the effectiveness of usingnormalizedhigh-order CNs, and potentially explains
why previous methods using high-order CNs do not always work (due to lack of normalization). In
practice, we use a method similar to batch normalization [Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015] to estimate the
number of walks efficiently, avoiding the computational overhead of exact counting.
By combining both techniques with previous methods [Wang et al., 2024], we proposeOrthogonal
Common Neighbor(OCN) and its variant with an approximated and faster orthogonalization
process, Orthogonal Common Neighbor with Polynomial Filters (OCNP). In our experiments, the
performance of OCN and OCNP significantly outperforms existing models, achieving state-of-the-art
results on several Open Graph Benchmark datasets [Hu et al., 2020]. Ablation studies also verify the
effectiveness of orthogonalization and normalization.
2 Preliminaries
For an undirected graph G= (V, E, A, X) , where V={1,2, . . . , n} represents the set of n nodes,
E⊆V×V denotes the edge set, X∈R n×F is a matrix of node features, and A∈R n×n is the
symmetric adjacency matrix. The entries of the adjacency matrix are defined such that Auv = 1
2