0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
Edge Index
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8JSD Value
Jensen Shannon Distance (Original vs Orthogonalized CN)
Original JSD
Orthogonalized JSD
Density
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
JSD Difference
Figure 6: This figure demonstrates that orthogonalization reduces redundancy in higher-order common
neighbors, as shown by the increased and concentrated JSD values, making the representations more
independent and distinguishable.
A Evaluating the Effectiveness of Orthogonalization
The orthogonalization process removes redundant information at the matrix granularity. However, for
the point pairs (i, j) that we are interested in, we need to measure the similarity of the distribution of
information between different k-hop CNs at different orders for this point pair. By comparing the
difference in similarity at the edge granularity before and after the orthogonalization process, we
can objectively assess the effectiveness of orthogonalization in eliminating redundant information at
a finer granularity. We introduce the Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) as a metric, with the core
goal being to verify whether orthogonalization can effectively reduce the similarity of the common
neighbor matrices between different orders for each edge.
Let pe and qe represent the vector corresponding to edge e= (i, j) in the matrices of CN α and CN β,
respectively. We will normalize them: ˜pe = peP
k pe,k
,˜q e = qeP
k qe,k
, and then substitute them into
the definition of Jensen-Shannon distance:
DJS (pe, qe) = 1
2 (DKL(˜pe ∥˜me) +D KL(˜qe ∥˜me)),(8)
where˜me and˜qe represent the average of˜pe and˜qe, which are defined as˜me = 1
2(˜pe + ˜qe).
As shown in the left part of Figure 6, taking the Collab dataset’sCN 1 and CN 2 as an example, the
JSD values between each edge’s distribution ofCN 1 and CN 2 are represented by the orange points.
The JSD values after orthogonalization (purple points) are generally higher and more concentrated,
indicating that the orthogonalization process has successfully transformed the higher-order CN
matrices into more independent and distinguishable representations for each node pair (i, j). The
density curve on the right reflects the difference before and after orthogonalization for each edge. It
is evident that the JSD values for the majority of(i, j)pairs have increased after orthogonalization.
B Detailed Representation and Meaning of High-order Common Neighbors
According to Equation (1), assuming there exist k-hop CNs for the two endpoints of interest, the
following cases arise:
For k-hop CNs, if l= 2λ (even), the path contains exactly one k-hop CN (each endpoint is k-hops
away from the CN). However, there might be more than one such k-hop path. In this case, we
constructωas shown below:
 ωi0···ˆik···i2k
=A k
i0ik Ak
i2kik ∀ik ∈V
ωi0 · · ·ˆip · · ·i2k = 0p∈[0,2k], p∈Z, p̸=k (9)
15