Building on this, we introduce Orthogonal Common Neighbor with Polynomial Filters (OCNP).
We can select any popular orthogonal polynomial bases (e.g., Jacobi, Monomial, Chebyshev, or
Bernstein). This operation can be viewed as passing the signal of each edge through a filter defined
by the chosen polynomial, thereby adjusting the frequency characteristics of the signal. For a detailed
analysis, please refer to Appendix J.
5 Normalization
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Order of Common Neighbors Between Nodes
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Total Variance / Total Mean
33.64
18.27
12.80
9.05
7.33
6.05 5.59 5.06 5.02 4.74
Unnormalized
Normalized
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Total Variance / Total Mean
1.00 0.99 0.98
0.94
0.87
0.76
0.64
0.53
0.46
0.41
Figure 2: To demonstrate that the higher-
order common neighbors of different
node pairs become similar, we use the
Cora dataset as an example. We cal-
culate the coefficient of variation (CV),
which is the ratio of the standard devia-
tion to the mean, of the CNs of different
nodes at the same order. High CV in-
dicates low over-smoothing degree. Re-
sults shows that as the order increase,
over-smoothing becomes more and more
significant, but our method (yellow) can
alleviate this problem.
A common issue is that, as the order of CNs increases,
the high-order CNs of different nodes become more sim-
ilar. To quantify this effect, we analyze the coefficient of
variation of CNs at different orders across various nodes.
As shown in Figure 2, the coefficient of variation de-
creases at higher orders, indicating that the high-order
CNs of different nodes begin to overlap more frequently
and that the similarity of higher-order neighborhood struc-
tures continually increases. This may lead to a loss of
distinctiveness among nodes. In other words, as we con-
sider more hops in the network, the feature representations
of links become increasingly homogeneous, potentially
undermining the performance of link prediction models.
This observation is consistent with the intuitive motiva-
tion behind our normalization trick. Specifically, when a
node participates in a large number of walks, it will more
frequently appear as a CN for other node pairs, causing
the features of different links to become similar and thus
leading to over-smoothing. Therefore, we propose a nor-
malization trick similar to batch normalization [Ioffe and
Szegedy, 2015] to mitigate this issue. We divide the co-
efficient of each node by the number of walks in which it
participates to obtainnormalizedCN. This normalization technique helps to reduce the influence of
frequently appearing common neighbors, ensuring that nodes with a large number of high-order walk
participations are not overly emphasized.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Order of the k-hop CNs
Upper Bound of Distance
unnormalizedCN
normalizedCN
Figure 3: The impact of higher-order k-hop CNs
on the upper bound of dij is illustrated. k-hop
CNs have no effect (blue line). The yellow line
shows how the upper bound tightens with increas-
ing k, which is the result obtained after introducing
normalizedCN. With normalizedCN, the contribu-
tion of each k-hop CN is nowP
c∈CN k(i,j)
1
|Pk(c)|
rather than just 1.
normalizedCNprovides the following insight:
If k-hop CNs are less frequently shared among
other node pairs, then these k-hop CNs carry
greater significance in the relationship between
the two nodes.For example, if the more distant
social circles in which two individuals indirectly
participate include many people (i.e., are more
mainstream), then the commonalities between
these two individuals will be fewer. Conversely,
if the social circle is more niche, it suggests a
higher potential for a direct connection between
the two individuals.
This compensates for the traditional Resource
Allocation (RA) [Zhou et al., 2009] method,
which ignores the potential contribution of k-
hop CNs and fails to account for the higher-order
structure of the graph. Next, we analyze this
trick theoretically using a random graph model
and prove its effectiveness. It can be seen that
when the path or walk has a length of 1, the path count reduces to the node degree, andnormalizedCN
degenerates to RA.
5