OCN: Effectively Utilizing Higher-Order Common
Neighbors for Better Link Prediction
Juntong Wang1,2 Xiyuan Wang1,2 Muhan Zhang1∗
1Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
jtwang25@stu.pku.edu.cn,{wangxiyuan,muhan}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
Common Neighbors (CNs) and their higher-order variants are important pairwise
features widely used in state-of-the-art link prediction methods. However, existing
methods often struggle with the repetition across different orders of CNs and fail
to fully leverage their potential. We identify that these limitations stem from two
key issues: redundancy and over-smoothing in high-order common neighbors. To
address these challenges, we design orthogonalization to eliminate redundancy be-
tween different-order CNs and normalization to mitigate over-smoothing. By com-
bining these two techniques, we propose Orthogonal Common Neighbor (OCN), a
novel approach that significantly outperforms the strongest baselines by an average
of 7.7% on popular link prediction benchmarks. A thorough theoretical analysis
is provided to support our method. Ablation studies also verify the effectiveness
of our orthogonalization and normalization techniques. Code is available at: /gtb
https://github.com/qingpingmo/OCN
1 Introduction
The application of link prediction spans numerous fields. For example, it can be used to forecast
website hyperlinks [Zhu et al., 2002]. In bioinformatics, it plays a critical role in analyzing protein-
protein interactions (PPIs) [Airoldi et al., 2008]. Similarly, in e-commerce, link prediction is a core
component in developing recommendation systems [Huang et al., 2005, Lü et al., 2012]. Currently,
the most popular link prediction models are based on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). The first GNN
for link prediction was the Graph AutoEncoder (GAE) [Kipf and Welling, 2016]. It uses the inner
product of the two target nodes’ representations, produced by a Message Passing Neural Network
(MPNN) [Gilmer et al., 2017], as the logits for the probability that a link exists between the two
nodes. Despite its success on some citation graphs, such as Cora [Sen et al., 2008], GAE computes
the representations of two nodes separately, thus failing to capture structural relationships between
them, such as the number of common neighbors (i.e., nodes connected to both target nodes by an
edge), which is a crucial heuristic in link prediction.
To address the inability to capture pairwise structural relationships, various methods have been
proposed [Zhang et al., 2021, Yun et al., 2021, Chamberlain et al., 2023, Wang et al., 2024]. Although
these methods differ in their detailed implementations, they all focus on computing the neighborhood
overlap between the two target nodes, which includes both common neighbors andhigher-order
common neighbors(nodes connected to the two target nodes via a walk or path). While higher-order
common neighbors provide auxiliary information to common neighbors and improve performance in
some cases [Yun et al., 2021, Chamberlain et al., 2023], they have not yet been widely adopted and
do not always improve performance due to two key problems:
∗Correspondence to Muhan Zhang
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
arXiv:2505.19719v2  [cs.LG]  9 Mar 2026