PDF p3 regular-layer paragraph
making it much cheaper to store, compute and invert1. Speciﬁcally for a layerl that receives inputh
of sizedin and computes linear pre-activationsa =W⊤h of sizedout (biases omitted for simplicity)
followed by some non-linear activation function, let the backpropagated gradient ona beδ = ∂ℓ
∂a .
The gradients on parameters θ(l) = W will be ∇W = ∂ℓ
∂W = vec(hδ⊤). The Kronecker factored
approximation of correspondingG(l) = E
[
∇W ∇⊤
W
]
will useA = E
[
hh⊤]
andB = E
[
δδ⊤]
i.e.
matrices of sizedin ×din anddout ×dout, whereas the fullG(l) would be of sizedindout ×dindout.
Using this Kronecker approximation (known as KFAC) corresponds to approximating entries ofG(l)
as follows:G(l)
ij,i′j′ = E
[
∇Wij ∇⊤
Wi′j′
]
= E [(hiδj)(hi′δj′)] ≈ E [hihi′] E [δjδj′].
A similar principle can be applied to obtain a Kronecker-factored expression for the covariance of the
gradients of the parameters of a convolutional layer (Grosse & Martens, 2016). To obtain matrices
A andB one then needs to also sum over spatial locations and corresponding receptive ﬁelds, as
illustrated in Figure 1.
PDF p3 §3
3 Proposed method
3.1 Motivation: reﬂexion on diagonal rescaling in different coordinate bases
It is instructive to contrast the type of “exact” natural gradient preconditioning of the gradient that
uses the full Fisher Information Matrix would yield, to what we do when approximating this by using
a diagonal matrix only. Using the full matrixG = E[∇θ∇⊤
θ ] yields the natural gradient update: θ ←
θ−ηG−1∇θ. When resorting to a diagonal approximation we instead useGdiag = diag(σ2
1,...,σ 2
nθ )
whereσ2
i =Gi,i = E[(∇θ)2
i ]. So that update θ ←θ −ηG−1
diag∇θ amounts to preconditioning the
gradient vector ∇θ by dividing each of its coordinates by an estimated second moment σ2
i . This
diagonal rescaling happens in the initial basis of parametersθ. By contrast, a full natural gradient
update can be seen to do a similar diagonal rescaling, not along the initial parameter basis axes, but
along the axes of the eigenbasis of the matrix G. Let G = USU⊤ be the eigendecomposition of
G. The operations that yield the full natural gradient update G−1∇θ = US−1U⊤∇θ correspond
to the sequence of a) multiplying gradient vector ∇θ byU⊤ which corresponds to switching to the
eigenbasis:U⊤∇θ yields the coordinates of the gradient vector expressed in that basis b) multiplying
by a diagonal matrixS−1, which rescales each coordinatei (in that eigenbasis) byS−1
ii c) multiplying
byU, which switches the rescaled vector back to the initial basis of parameters. It is easy to show
thatSii = E[(U⊤∇θ)2
i ] (proof is given in Appendix A.2). So similarly to what we do when using a
diagonal approximation, we are rescaling by the second moment of gradient vector components, but
rather than doing this in the initial parameter basis, we do this in the eigenbasis ofG. Note that the
variance measured along the leading eigenvector can be much larger than the variance along the axes
of the initial parameter basis, so the effects of the rescaling by using either the fullG or its diagonal
approximation can be very different.
Now what happens when we use the less crude KFAC approximation instead? We approximate 2
G ≈ A ⊗B yielding the update θ ← θ −η(A ⊗B)−1∇θ. Let us similarly look at it through its
eigendecomposition. The eigendecomposition of the Kronecker productA ⊗B of two real symmetric
1Since (A⊗ B)−1 = A−1⊗ B−1.
2This approximation is done separately for each block G(l), we dropped the superscript to simplify notations.
3
PDF p4
positive semi-deﬁnite matrices can be expressed using their own eigendecompositionA =UASAU⊤
A
andB =UBSBU⊤
B , yieldingA ⊗B = (UASAU⊤
A ) ⊗ (UBSBU⊤
B ) = (UA ⊗UB)(SA ⊗SB)(UA ⊗
UB)⊤.UA ⊗UB gives the orthogonal eigenbasis of the Kronecker product, we call it the Kronecker-
Factored Eigenbasis (KFE).SA ⊗SB is the diagonal matrix containing the associated eigenvalues.
Note that each such eigenvalue will be a product of an eigenvalue ofA stored inSA and an eigenvalue
ofB stored inSB. We can view the action of the resulting Kronecker-factored preconditioning in the
same way as we viewed the preconditioning by the full matrix: it consists in a) expressing gradient
vector ∇θ in a different basisUA ⊗UB which can be thought of as approximating the directions of
U, b) doing a diagonal rescaling bySA ⊗SB in that basis, c) switching back to the initial parameter
space. Here however the rescaling factor (SA ⊗SB)ii is not guaranteed to match the second moment
along the associated eigenvector E[((UA ⊗UB)⊤∇θ)2
i ].
In summary (see Figure 2):
• Full matrix G preconditioning will scale by variances estimated along the eigenbasis ofG.
• Diagonal preconditioning will scale by variances properly estimated, but along the initial
parameter basis, which can be very far from the eigenbasis ofG.
• KFAC preconditioning will scale the gradient along the KFE basis that will likely be closer
to the eigenbasis ofG, but doesn’t use properly estimated variances along these axes for this
scaling (the scales being themselves constrained to being a Kronecker productSA ⊗SB).
- Fisher 
- Diagonal 
- K-FAC 
- EKFAC
Eigenspectrum of 
approximations
Rescaling of the gradient is done along a speciﬁc basis; length of vectors
indicate (square root of) amount of downscaling. Exact Fisher Information
Matrix rescales according to eigenvectors/values of exact covariance struc-
ture (green ellipse). Diagonal approximation uses parameter coordinate
basis, scaling by actual variance measured along these axes (indicated by
horizontal and vertical orange arrows touching exactly the ellipse), KFAC
uses directions that approximate Fisher Information Matrix eigenvectors,
but uses approximate scaling (blue arrows not touching the ellipse). EK-
FAC corrects this.
Figure 2: Cartoon illustration of rescaling achieved by different preconditioning strategies
3.2 Eigenvalue-corrected Kronecker Factorization (EKFAC)
To correct for the potentially inexact rescaling of KFAC, and obtain a better but still computationally
efﬁcient approximation, instead ofGKF AC=A⊗B = (UA⊗UB)(SA⊗SB)(UA⊗UB)⊤ we propose
to use an Eigenvalue-corrected Kronecker Factorization: GEKFAC = (UA ⊗UB)S∗(UA ⊗UB)⊤
whereS∗ is the diagonal matrix deﬁned by S∗
ii = s∗
i = E[((UA ⊗UB)⊤∇θ)2
i ]. Vector s∗ is the
vector of second moments of the gradient vector coordinates expressed in the Kronecker-factored
Eigenbasis (KFE)UA ⊗UB and can be efﬁciently estimated and stored.
In Appendix A.1 we prove that thisS∗ is the optimal diagonal rescaling in that basis, in the sense that
S∗ = arg minS ∥G − (UA ⊗UB)S(UA ⊗UB)⊤∥F s.t.S is diagonal: it minimizes the approximation
error to G as measured by Frobenius norm (denoted ∥ · ∥F ), which KFAC’s correspondingS =
SA ⊗SB cannot generally achieve. A corollary of this is that we will always have∥G−GEKF AC∥F ≤
∥G −GKF AC∥F i.e. EKFAC yields a better approximation ofG than KFAC (Theorem 2 proven in
Appendix). Figure 2 illustrates the different rescaling strategies, including EKFAC.
Potential beneﬁts: Since EKFAC is a better approximation ofG than KFAC (in the limited sense
of Frobenius norm of the residual) it may yield a better preconditioning of the gradient for optimizing
neural networks3. Another beneﬁt is linked to computational efﬁciency: even if KFAC yields a
reasonably good approximation in practice, it is costly to re-estimate and invert matricesA andB, so
this has to be amortized over many updates: re-estimation of the preconditioning is thus typically
done at a much lower frequency than the parameter updates, and may lag behind, no longer accurately
reﬂecting the local 2nd order information. Re-estimating the Kronecker-factored Eigenbasis (KFE)
3Although there is no guarantee. In particular GEKF ACbeing a better approximation of G does not guarantee
that G−1
EKF AC∇θ will be closer to the natural gradient update direction G−1∇θ .
4