GradInit: Learning to Initialize Neural Networks for Stable and Efﬁcient Training
vision domain, we show it accelerates the convergence and
test performance of a variety of deep architectures, from the
purely feed-forward VGG net to ResNet-110 and DenseNet-
100, with or without Batch Normalization. It is efﬁcient
and scalable, ﬁnding good initializations within less than
1% of the total training iterations and time in our experi-
ments, and it improves the initialization of ResNet-50 on
ImageNet to obtain better test accuracy. In the language
domain, GradInit enables training the original unmodiﬁed
Post-LN Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) using either
Adam or SGD without learning rate warmup for machine
translation, which was believed to be difﬁcult (Xiong et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2020). Finally, by visualizing the initial
norms and gradient variances of the weights before and after
GradInit is applied, we show with experiments that GradInit
is a useful tool for identifying potential causes for instability
at initialization, and we summarize useful design principles
for initializing complex architectures that are learned by
GradInit.
2. Background
Controlling the norms of network parameters at initialization
has proven to be an effective approach to speeding up and
stabilizing training. Glorot & Bengio (2010) studied how
the variance of features evolves with depth in feed-forward,
linear neural networks by assuming both activations and
weight matrices are independent and identical random vari-
ables. They developed a technique in which the variance of
each ﬁlter scales with its fan-in (the number of input neu-
rons).This style of analysis was later generalized to the case
of ReLU networks (He et al., 2015). These two analyses
are most effective for feed-forward networks without skip
connections or normalization layers. Based on the orthog-
onal initialization scheme (Saxe et al., 2013), Mishkin &
Matas (2016) proposed an iterative procedure to rescale the
orthogonally initialized weights of each layer so that the
activations of that layer have unit variance. However, this
method fails to prevent the blowup of activations with depth
for ResNets (Dauphin & Schoenholz, 2019).
For more complex architectures, normalization layers (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015; Ba et al., 2016) and skip connections (He
et al., 2016) stabilized training dynamics and improved the
state-of-the-art. Similarly, learning rate warmup is a com-
mon trick for training large Transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017). These methods make training tractable for some mod-
els, but do not eliminate the high initial gradient variance
that destabilizes training when the network is deep (Zhang
et al., 2019; De & Smith, 2020; Brock et al., 2021a) or when
the normalization layer is not carefully positioned (Xiong
et al., 2020).
Several authors have proposed better initializations for net-
works with skip connections. This is often achieved by
replacing the normalization layers with some simple scal-
ing or bias operations, and scaling the weight matrices in
each layer so that the variance of activations does not in-
crease with depth (Zhang et al., 2019; De & Smith, 2020;
Brock et al., 2021a;b). Similar analysis has been applied to
self attention in Transformers (Huang et al., 2020). With-
out removing the normalization layers, another approach
is to introduce carefully initialized learnable scale factors
to the skip connections (Liu et al., 2020b) or the residual
branches (Bachlechner et al., 2020) to stabilize the initial pa-
rameter updates. However, such analyses are often restricted
to one speciﬁc architecture such as ResNets.
Recently, (Dauphin & Schoenholz, 2019) proposed a task-
agnostic and automatic initialization method, MetaInit, for
any task and neural network achitecture, by optimizing the
wegiht norms to minimize the “gradient quotient”, which
measures the effect of curvature near the initial parameters,
on minibatches of random Gaussian samples. However,
training data is usually accessible to us for most tasks of in-
terest; we simply utilize the training data for our algorithm.
MetaInit also involves the gradient of a Hessian-vector prod-
uct, which requires computing a ”gradient of the gradient”
multiple times in tandem, and is very computationally in-
tensive. Our proposed method distinguishes itself from
MetaInit in the following ways: (i) Our method is more efﬁ-
cient. MetaInit involves computing third-order derivatives,
results in long computing times and high memory usage.
The memory overhead of MetaInit is more of an issue for
networks with normalization layers. For the relatively small-
scale CIFAR-10 problem with batch size 64, MetaInit re-
quires 3 GPUs (RTX 2080Ti), while the proposed GradInit
needs just one. (ii) Our method takes the stochasticity of
minibatches into account (Section 3.3). MetaInit utilizes
the local curvature evaluated on a single minibatch, which
fails to capture the variance of the loss/gradient between two
different stochastic minibatches. (iii) Our method considers
the training dynamics of different optimization algorithms
including the learning rate and the direction of the gradient
step, and effectively handles different optimizers including
SGD and Adam.
3. Method
Overview We aim to develop an initialization scheme ap-
plicable to any network architecture. The proposed method
initializes each tensor of network parameters with a (ﬁxed)
array of random numbers drawn from a Gaussian distribu-
tion, multiplied by a (trainable) scalar that controls the norm
of the initial tensor. By learning a unique scale factor for
each parameter tensor in each layer, we hope to stabilize
the training process. We aggregate these scale factors in an
initialization vectorm, and then optimize this vector so that
the ﬁrst step taken by an optimizerA (either SGD or Adam)