GradInit: Learning to Initialize Neural Networks for Stable and Efﬁcient Training
randomly sampled training data. Please refer to Appendix B
for detailed comparisons.
3.4. Using stop-gradients to accelerate training
Obtaining an exact gradient of the objective (1) requires
computing a second-order gradient, which is potentially
expensive. To accelerate computation, our implementation
treatsA[g(S;θm)] in the objective like a constant, i.e., we
do not compute gradients through this term. Interestingly,
we have found that computing approximate gradients in this
way has almost no effect on the performance of the method
compared to using exact second-order gradients. In addition
to speeding up computation and saving memory, this trick
also makes it possible to handle the Adam optimizer since
in this caseA[g] = sign[g], which is not differentiable.
Algorithm 1 GradInit, our proposed algorithm for learning
the initialization of neural networks. Typical values are
α = 10−2,β = 0. We do not backpropagate throughηA[gt]
when computing the gradient∇mt
˜Lt+1, and so we color
this symbol gray.
1: Input: Target optimization algorithm A, target learning rate
η, learning rateτ of the scalesm, initial parametersθ0, total
iterationsT , upper bound of the gradientγ, lower bound for
the weight and bias scalesα,β .
2: m1 ← 1
3: fort = 1 toT do
4: Draw random samples St from training set
5: Lt ← 1
|St|
∑
xk∈Stℓ(xk;θmt )
6: gt ← ∇θLt
7: if ∥gt∥pA >γ then
8: mt+1 =mt −τ ∇mt ∥gt∥pA
9: else
10: Draw |St|/2 samples to replace |St|/2 samples inSt.
Let this new minibatch be ˜St.
11: ˜Lt+1 ← 1
| ˜St|
∑
xk∈ ˜Stℓ(xk;θmt −ηA[gt])
12: mt+1 =mt −τ ∇mt
˜Lt+1
13: Clamp mt+1 usingα,β
3.5. Solving the constrained problem
We use a simple trick to enforce the constraint in (1). Af-
ter computingg(S;θm), we test whether the constraint is
satisﬁed. If not, we take a gradient descent step to min-
imize∥g(S;θm)∥pA, which involves computing second
order derivatives. If the constraint is satisﬁed, then we in-
stead compute a gradient descent step for the loss using
stop-gradients.
Similar to the case where A is Adam and the ﬁrst gra-
dient step has a ﬁxed length, for SGD, we ﬁnd us-
ingA[g(S;θm)] = γg(S;θm)/∥g(S;θm)∥2 instead of
g(S;θm) gives better results, so we also adaopt this nor-
malization in all our experiments.
In addition, we set a lower bound α = 0.01 for all αi,
which allows any weight matrix to be small enough, but
also prevents the gradient from vanishing so that GradInit
can ﬁnd good scale factors for all layers quickly. In our
experiments, we ﬁnd the only layer that will possibly hit this
lower bound is usually the ﬁnal FC layer (see the ﬁgures in
Section 4.1). Forβi, we simply enforce it to be non-negative,
as zero biases do not cause vanishing gradients.
We ﬁnd this procedure converges quite reliably in a few
thousands (e.g., 2000 iterations for ImageNet) if not a few
hundreds (e.g., 390 iterations for CIFAR-10) of iterations,
taking less than 1% of the total training time, and that the
gradient norm constraint is satisﬁed for the majority of
iterations.
4. Experiments
We evaluate GradInit on benchmark datasets for image clas-
siﬁcation and machine translation tasks. For image classi-
ﬁcation, eight different architectures are evaluated for CI-
FAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), and ResNet-50 is evalu-
ated for ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). For machine trans-
lation, we use GradInit to ﬁnd good initializations for a
Post-LN Transformer without any change to its original ar-
chitecture on IWSLT-14 De-En (Cettolo et al., 2014). We
observe that the method can remove the necessity of any
form of learning rate warmup without any change to its
architecture. We are the ﬁrst to report such results to the
best of our knowledge.
We conduct our experiments in PyTorch, and use the fairseq
library for machine translation (Ott et al., 2019). All the
experiments on CIFAR-10 and IWSLT-14 DE-EN can run
with one single NVIDIA RTX 2080 Ti GPU of 11GB RAM.
For ImageNet, we use four of the same GPUs with a total
batch size of 256. Due to the difference in the library for
training and the number of GPUs used, which affects the
BN statistics, our baseline top-1 accuracy on ImageNet is
0.79% lower than (Goyal et al., 2017).
GradInit starts from Kaiming initialization (He et al., 2015)
for all the Conv and FC layers for image classiﬁcation, and
the default Xavier initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010) for
machine translation. If normalization layers are used in the
network architecture, their scale and bias coefﬁcients are ini-
tialized to one and zero, respectively. We optimize the scale
factors{αi,βi}M
i=1 with Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) using
the default momentum parameters (β1 = 0.9,β 2 = 0.999)
and clamp the gradient of each αi,βi to be no larger than
one in all experiments. MetaInit was originally designed to
be task-agnostic, and learns to initialize the network with
random samples as inputs. Here, for fair comparisons, we
also feed training data to MetaInit, as this should intuitively
improve MetaInit for the speciﬁc task, and use Adam with