GradInit: Learning to Initialize Neural Networks
for Stable and Efﬁcient Training
Chen Zhu 1 Renkun Ni 1 Zheng Xu 2 Kezhi Kong 1 W. Ronny Huang2 Tom Goldstein1
Abstract
Changes in neural architectures have fostered sig-
niﬁcant breakthroughs in language modeling and
computer vision. Unfortunately, novel architec-
tures often require re-thinking the choice of hyper-
parameters (e.g., learning rate, warmup schedule,
and momentum coefﬁcients) to maintain stabil-
ity of the optimizer. This optimizer instability
is often the result of poor parameter initializa-
tion, and can be avoided by architecture-speciﬁc
initialization schemes. In this paper, we present
GradInit, an automated and architecture agnos-
tic method for initializing neural networks. Gra-
dInit is based on a simple heuristic; the variance
of each network layer is adjusted so that a sin-
gle step of SGD or Adam results in the smallest
possible loss value. This adjustment is done by
introducing a scalar multiplier variable in front of
each parameter block, and then optimizing these
variables using a simple numerical scheme. Gra-
dInit accelerates the convergence and test perfor-
mance of many convolutional architectures, both
with or without skip connections, and even with-
out normalization layers. It also enables train-
ing the original Post-LN Transformer for ma-
chine translation without learning rate warmup
under a wide range of learning rates and momen-
tum coefﬁcients. Code is available at https:
//github.com/zhuchen03/gradinit.
1. Introduction
A major problem when applying novel deep learning models
in new domains is optimizer instability resulting from poor
parameter initialization. Carefully crafted initializations that
prevent gradient explosion/vanishing in back propagation
were an important part of early successes with feed-forward
networks (Glorot & Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015). Even
1University of Maryland, College Park 2Google Research. Cor-
respondence to: Chen Zhu <chenzhu@umd.edu>, Zheng Xu
<xuzheng@google.com>, Tom Goldstein<tomg@umd.edu>.
Preprint.
when cleverly designed initialization rules are used, com-
plex models with many layers or multiple branches often
still suffer from instability, requiring carefully tuned hy-
perparameters for the training process to converge. For
example, the Post-LN Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
can not converge without learning rate warmup using the
default initialization (Xiong et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2020b); RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) and GPT-
3 (Brown et al., 2020) have to tune theβ2 paramter of Adam
for stability when the batch size is large. While normal-
ization layers (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015; Ba et al., 2016) are
proposed to address the instability issue in part, recent inno-
vations have shown that architecture-speciﬁc initializations,
which are carefully derived to maintain stability, can mit-
igate these problems on their own, without normalization
layers (Zhang et al., 2019; De & Smith, 2020; Huang et al.,
2020; Brock et al., 2021a;b). Unfortunately, the reliance
on analytically derived initializations makes it difﬁcult to
realize the beneﬁts of these methods when performing ar-
chitecture search, when training networks with branched or
heterogeneous components, or when proposing altogether
new architectures.
In this work, we propose a simple method for learning the
initialization of a network. Typically, initialization schemes
draw each initial parameter independently from zero-mean
Gaussian distributions, with the variance of the distributions
set to pre-determined values depending on the dimensions
of the layers. Rather than using a rule-based choice for
the variance, our method rescales such initialized parameter
blocks (e.g. convolution kernels) by a learned scalar coefﬁ-
cient. This small set of coefﬁcients is optimized to make the
ﬁrst step of a stochastic optimizer (e.g. Adam) as effective
as possible at minimizing the training loss, while preventing
the initial gradient norm from exploding. This process takes
into account the direction and step size of the optimizer. It
also accounts for stochasticity by crafting an initialization
loss using two different minibatches of data. Finally, after
the initialization coefﬁcients have been learned, the random
network parameters are re-scaled and optimization proceeds
as normal.
Our proposed method, GradInit, is architecture agnostic,
and works with both Adam and SGD optimizers. In the
arXiv:2102.08098v1  [cs.LG]  16 Feb 2021