GradInit: Learning to Initialize Neural Networks for Stable and Efﬁcient Training
descends as quickly as possible while keeping the size of
gradient within prescribed bounds.
Setup We are interested in ﬁnding better initializations for
the parameters of each parameterized linear operation (layer)
of the neural network.1 We begin by ﬁlling the weight matri-
ces{Wi} and bias vectors{bi} of the network with values
drawn from independent zero-mean Gaussian distributions,
wherei = 1...M denotes the layer index, and the variance
of the Gaussian distributions are decided by the fan-in and
fan-out of the layer to approximately preserve the variance
of the activations and gradients (Glorot & Bengio, 2010; He
et al., 2015). These weights and biases are not modiﬁed by
the proposed algorithm. For eachi, we pairWi andbi with
learnable non-negative scalars αi and βi that control the
scaling of the layer at initialization. We usem to denote the
vector of scale factors [α1,β 1,··· ,αM,βM ], and letθm be
the tuple [α1W1,β 1b1,··· ,αMWM,βMbM ] of rescaled
parameters.
Let L(S;θ) = 1
|S|
∑
x∈Sℓ(x;θ) be the average loss of
the model parameterized by θ on a minibatch of samples
S, where|S| is the number of samples in the minibatch.
We useg(S;θ) = ∇θL(S;θ) as a shorthand for the gra-
dient ofθ. During standard training, this gradient is pre-
processed/preconditioned by the optimization algorithmA,
and then used to update the network parameters. For the
ﬁrst gradient step, SGD uses A[g(S;θm)] = g(S;θm),
while Adam usesA[g(S;θm)] = sign(g(S;θm)) (Balles
& Hennig, 2018).
Algorithm We aim to optimizem to learn a good initial-
izationθm tailored for a target stochastic gradient methodA
with learning rateη. In doing do, we consider theﬁrst update
stepθm−ηA[g(S;θm)] of the algorithm, which computes
a gradient, applies the optimizer-speciﬁc pre-processing,
and then takes a step in the negative gradient direction with
learning rate η. We tune the initialization so that the loss
after this ﬁrst gradient step is as low as possible.
Formally, we optimize the scale factorsm through the fol-
lowing constrained optimization objective
minimize
m
L( ˜S;θm−ηA[g(S;θm)]),
subject to ∥g(S;θm)∥pA≤γ,
(1)
whereS and ˜S are two different random minibatches,γ >
0 is a constant, and ∥·∥pA is the ℓp-norm with p = pA
chosen according to the optimization algorithm A. For
SGD, we choose pSGD = 2 and measure the constraint in
theℓ2 (Euclidean) norm. When Adam is used, we choose
pAdam = 1 and measure the constraint in theℓ1 norm.
1“Parameterized linear operation” includes, e.g., convolutions,
the scale and bias of normalization layers, referred to as “layer”
afterwards.
The problem (1) is solved using a stochastic gradient de-
scent method in which we sample new mini-batches on each
iteration. Since the proposed method uses gradient updates
to compute the initialization, we dub it GradInit.
We discuss the choice of this formulation, and a simple
algorithm for approximately solving it below. Pseudocode
for the proposed method is given in Algorithm 1.
3.1. Choosing the constraint
The constraint in (1) is included to prevent the network from
minimizing the loss in a trivial way by blowing up the gradi-
ents. With this constraint in place, the loss is minimized by
choosing the initialization so that the gradient direction is
informative and effective, rather than because the gradient
magnitude is large.
From a ﬁrst-order approximation to the loss function, we
expect a gradient step in the direction A[g] to result in a
loss decrease of ηA[g]Tg. For SGD, the decrease in loss
is roughly ηA[g]Tg = η∥g∥2
2. We see that it is possible
to exploit the objective by blowing up the ℓ2-norm of the
gradient, and so we prevent this by setting pSGD = 2. For
Adam, ηA[g]Tg = η sign(g)g = η∥g∥1. The objective
can be exploited by blowing up theℓ1-norm, and so we set
pAdam = 1 in the constraint.
3.2. Handling bias parameters
In many ML software frameworks and architectures, the
biasesbi are initialized to 0, or are not present at all in some
layers, soβi has no effect on the initialization in this case.
However, our approach can be applied to the case where
bi ̸= 0 and so we consider bias parameters to maintain
generality.2
3.3. Stochasticity of mini-batching
The objective in (1) uses two different mini-batches; S is
used to compute the gradient, and ˜S is used to compute the
loss. The use of two minibatches is important. It is often
easy for large overparameterized neural networks to overﬁt
on a single minibatch. In our experiments, we found that
if we re-use the minibatch S for evaluating the loss, the
network tends to have large gradient norms that can quickly
reduce the loss onS by about 50% in only one iteration, but
the loss can explode for any other minibatch ˜S. However,
if ˜S is completely different fromS, we sometimes ﬁnd that
the optimizer is very slow to minimize the objective in Eq. 1
or it stalls for long periods of time. We ﬁnd that we get the
most reliable behavior using a compromise strategy where
˜S uses a mixture of 50% samples from S and 50% new
2For example, PyTorch initializes the biases to non-zero values
by default.