Under review
Before Growth
Before
ℓℓ-1
ℓ+1
Before
ℓℓ-1
ℓ+1
Auxiliary 
Connections 
Adding new layers with 
identitiy in between
Before
ℓℓ-1
ℓ+1
Auxiliary 
Connections New Layers
GradMax
Figure 1: Schematic view of the GradMax algorithm. Growing new neurons requires initializing
incoming (W new
ℓ ) and outgoing W new
ℓ+1 weights for the new neuron. GradMax sets incoming weights
to zero (dashed lines) in order to keep the output unchanged, and initializes outgoing weights us-
ing SVD (equation 11). This maximizes the gradients on the incoming weights with the aim of
accelerating training.
and focus on improving the training dynamics. We initialize the weights so that the network’s output
remains unchanged while trying to improve the training dynamics by maximizing the gradient norm.
The hypothesis is that this accelerates training and leads to a better model in the long run.
3 G RAD MAX
This section describes our main contribution: GradMax, a method that maximizes the gradient norm
of the new weights. We constrain the norm of the new weights to avoid the trivial solution where
the weight norm tends to inﬁnity. We also require that the network output is unchanged when the
neuron is added. Note that, due the latter, gradients of the existing weights are unchanged during
growth and therefore we maximize the gradients on the new weights introduced.
arg max
W new
ℓ ,W new
ℓ+1
ED
[ ∂L
∂W new
ℓ
]
2
F
+
ED
[ ∂L
∂W new
ℓ+1
]
2
F
s.t.
{
∥W new
ℓ ∥F,
W new
ℓ+1

F≤c
W new
ℓ+1hnew
ℓ = 0 (4)
Motivation: Large gradients lead to large objective decrease Con-
sider running gradient descent on a function that is differentiable with a
β-Lipschitz gradient. A classical result for this class of functions is that
the decrease in objective function after one step of gradient descent with
step-size 1/β is upper bounded by L(Wℓ)− β
2∥∇L(Wℓ)∥2 (Nesterov,
2003). This upper-bound decreases as the norm of the gradient increases.
This observation implies that the larger the gradient, the larger the ex-
pected decrease (assuming a constant Lipschitz constant). Hence, in-
terleaving gradient maximizing steps within training will lead to an im-
proved decrease in later iterations. We use this observation in the context
of growing neural networks and propose a method that interleaves the
normal training process with steps that maximize the gradient norm by
adding new units, which we now describe in detail.
Wℓ
L(Wℓ)− β
2∥∇L(Wℓ)∥2
L(Wℓ)
GradMax The general maximization problem in eq. (4) is non-trivial to solve. However, we show
that with some simplifying assumptions we can ﬁnd an approximate solution using a singular value
decomposition (SVD). Here we derive this solution using fully connected layers and share derivation
for convolutional layers at Appendix B.
Consider 3 fully connected layers denoted with indicesℓ− 1,ℓ andℓ + 1 and the following recursive
deﬁnition:
zℓ = Wℓhℓ−1 (5)
hℓ =f (zℓ), (6)
where subscripts denote layer-indices. Let Mℓ denote the number of units in layer ℓ, and f the
activation function. The vectors zℓ, hℓ∈ RMℓ are pre-activations and activations respectively, with
h0 = x being an input sampled from the dataset D. The entries of Wℓ ∈ RMℓ−1×Mℓ are the
parameters of the layer.
3