Under review
GRAD MAX: G ROWING NEURAL NETWORKS USING
GRADIENT INFORMATION
Utku Evci, Max Vladymyrov, Thomas Unterthiner,
Bart van Merri¨enboer, Fabian Pedregosa
Google Research, Brain Team
{evcu,mxv,unterthiner,bartvm,pedregosa}@google.com
ABSTRACT
The architecture and the parameters of neural networks are often optimized in-
dependently, which requires costly retraining of the parameters whenever the ar-
chitecture is modiﬁed. In this work we instead focus on growing the architecture
without requiring costly retraining. We present a method that adds new neurons
during training without impacting what is already learned, while improving the
training dynamics. We achieve the latter by maximizing the gradients of the new
weights and ﬁnd the optimal initialization efﬁciently by means of the singular
value decomposition (SVD). We call this technique Gradient Maximizing Growth
(GradMax) and demonstrate its effectiveness in variety of vision tasks and archi-
tectures.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
The architecture of deep learning models inﬂuences a model’s inductive biases and has been
shown to have a crucial effect on both the training speed and generalization (d ´Ascoli et al., 2019;
Neyshabur, 2020). Searching for the best architecture for a given task is an active research area
with diverse approaches, including neural architecture search (NAS) (Elsken et al., 2019), pruning
(Liu et al., 2018), and evolutionary algorithms (Stanley & Miikkulainen, 2002). Most of these ap-
proaches are costly, as they require large search spaces or large architectures to start with. In this
work we consider an alternative approach: Can we start with a small network and learn an efﬁcient
architecture without ever needing a large network or exceeding the size of our ﬁnal architecture?
The idea of incrementally increasing the size of a model has been used in many settings such as
boosting (Friedman, 2001), continual learning (Rusu et al., 2016), architecture search (Elsken et al.,
2017), optimization (Fukumizu & Amari, 2000), and reinforcement learning (Berner et al., 2019).
Despite the wide range of applications of growing neural networks, the initialization of newly grown
neurons is rarely studied. Existing work on growing neural networks either adds new neurons ran-
domly (Chen et al., 2016; Berner et al., 2019) or chooses them with the aim of decreasing the
training loss (Bengio et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2020a). In this work we take a different
approach. Instead of improving the training objective immediately through growing, we focus on
improving the subsequent training dynamics. As we will show, this has a longer-lasting effect than
the greedy approach of improving loss during growing.
Our main contribution is a new growing method that maximizes the gradient norm of newly added
neurons, which we call GradMax. We show that this gradient maximization problem can be solved
in a closed form using the singular value decomposition (SVD) and initializing the new neurons
using the top k singular vectors. We show that the increased gradient norm persists during future
steps, which in return yields faster training.
2 G ROWING NEURAL NETWORKS
Neural network learning is often formalized as the following optimization problem:
arg min
f∈S
E(x,y)∼D [L(f (x), y)] , (1)
1We open source our code at https://github.com/google-research/growneuron.
1
arXiv:2201.05125v1  [cs.LG]  13 Jan 2022