Under review
whereS is a set of neural networks,L is a loss function andD is a data set consisting of inputsx and
outputs y). Most often the set S is constrained to a single architecture (e.g., ResNet-18 (Zagoruyko
& Komodakis, 2016)) and only the parameters of the model are learned. However, hand-crafted
architectures are often suboptimal and various approaches aim to optimize the architecture itself
together with its parameters.
Methods such as random search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012), NAS, and pruning search a larger space
that contains a variety of architectures. Growing neural networks has the same goal: It learns the
architecture and weights jointly. It aims to achieve this by incrementally increasing the size of the
model. Since this approach never requires training a large model from scratch it needs less memory
and compute than pruning methods (Yuan et al., 2021). Reducing the cost of ﬁnding efﬁcient archi-
tectures is important given the ever-growing size of architectures and the accompanying increase in
environmental footprint (Thompson et al., 2021).
Growing neural networks: When, where and how? Algorithms for growing neural networks
start training with a smaller seed architecture. Then over the course of the training new neurons
are added to the seed architecture, either increasing the width of the existing layers or creating new
layers. Algorithms for growing neural networks should address the following questions:
1. When to add new neurons? For instance, some methods (Liu et al., 2019; Kilcher et al.,
2019) require the training loss to plateau before growing, whereas others grow using a
predeﬁned schedule.
2. Where to add new capacity? We can add new neurons to the existing layers or create new
layers among the existing ones.
3. How to initialize the new capacity?
In this work we mainly focus on the question of how and introduce a new initialization method for
the new neurons. Our approach can also be used to guide when and where to grow new neurons.
However, in order to make our comparison with other initialization methods fair we keep the growing
schedule (where and when) ﬁxed.
How to grow new neurons? Suppose that during training we would like to grow k new neurons
at layerℓ as depicted in Figure 1. After the growth, new neurons are appended to the existing weight
matrices as follows:
W +
ℓ =
[
Wℓ
W new
ℓ
]
(2)
W +
ℓ+1 =
[ Wℓ+1 W new
ℓ+1
]
. (3)
A desirable property of growing algorithms is to preserve the information that the network has
learned. Therefore the initialization of new neurons should ensure our neural network has the same
outputs before and after growth.
We describe two main approaches to growing: splitting and adding. Splitting (Chen et al., 2016;
Liu et al., 2019) duplicates existing neurons and adjusts outgoing weights so that the output in the
next layer is unchanged. However, splitting has some limitations: (1) It creates neurons with the
same weights and small changes required to break symmetry; (2) It can’t be used for growing new
layers as it requires existing neurons to begin with.
Another line of work focuses onadding new neurons while ensuring that the output does not change
by setting eitherW new
ℓ or W new
ℓ+1 to zero. This approach doesn’t have the limitations mentioned above
and often results in better performance (Wu et al., 2020a). Below we summarize two methods that
use this approach:
Random Berner et al. (2019) initialize new neurons randomly when growing new layers.
Fireﬂy Wu et al. (2020a) combine splitting and adding random neurons. Random neurons are
trained for a few steps to reduce loss directly and the most promising neurons are selected
for growing.
Previous work focused either on solely keeping the output of the neural network the same (Random)
or on immediately reducing the training objective (Fireﬂy). In this work we take a different approach
2