On the Initialization of Graph Neural Networks
relied on the assumption of i.i.d. training instances devoid
of graph structure (and all neurons within each layer having
the same variance), which greatly simplifies the selection
of an appropriate distribution for drawing initial matrices.
The latter is usually a zero-mean uniform or Gaussian dis-
tribution with variance chosen to reduce the influence of
the model hidden dimension (LeCun et al., 2012; Glorot &
Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015) or activation function (He
et al., 2015) on the variance. However, GNN message pass-
ing layers and graph structure can impact initial variances in
more nuanced ways, for example, through dependencies in-
troduced by varying node-wise receptive-field sizes. Hence
prior assumptions may no longer apply and it behooves us
to consider GNN-specific alternatives.
For this purpose, we first present derivations for forward and
backward variances within a certain class of message pass-
ing GNNs. Specifically, for any given layer, we decompose
the variance of each node into the sum of variances over
message propagation paths, and then further decompose the
variance of each message propagation path into the sum
of variances over weight propagation paths. As a result of
these cascaded decompositions, we obtain expressions for
the variance of each node in terms of the variance of weight
matrices. These expressions disclose the combined impact
of hidden dimension, activation function, graph structure,
and message aggregation mechanism of the variance of hid-
den embeddings and gradients.
Based on these insights, we next propose a simple but
effective initialization method called Virgo for Variance
Instability Reduction within GNN Optimization to mitigate
the influence of these factors. Defining the overall variance
within each layer as the mean over the variances of all nodes,
Virgo minimizes the difference of overall variance between
successive layers, and thereby derives the variance of dis-
tributions, such as zero-mean Gaussian or uniform, from
which we can sample initial weight matrices for GNNs. Fi-
nally, we conduct comprehensive experiments on 15 datasets
across three popular graph tasks, namely, node classification,
link prediction, and graph classification. We compare Virgo
with existing initialization methods including Lecun, Xavier
and Kaiming. Overall, we make following contributions:
• We derive and analyze expressions for the variance of
GNN embeddings (forward pass) and gradients (back-
ward pass), showcasing how these quantities are af-
fected by the joint influences of hidden dimension,
activation function, graph structure, and GNN message
passing mechanisms.
• We propose a new initialization method named Virgo
for GNN weight matrices based on our analysis, which
minimizes the difference of the overall variance be-
tween successive layers.
• We evaluate GNNs with different initializations on
node classification, link prediction and graph classifi-
cation tasks. Virgo helps improve prediction accuracy
by up to 7% and well stabilizes variances at the initial-
ization.
2. Preliminaries
This section introduces basic GNN concepts and initializa-
tion methods. And for convenience, we summarize our
adopted notational conventions in Table 1.
2.1. Graph Neural Networks
Given a graph G = (X, A), where X is the feature matrix
of nodes, A is the graph adjacency matrix, the forward
propagation over G of the l-th GNN layer can be defined as:
hl
i = σ

 X
j∈N(i)
dijhl−1
j W l−1

 . (1)
In this expression, N(i) is a set including 1-hop neighbors of
node i, σ is an activation function, which we assume to be
ReLU in this paper, W l ∈ Rm(l)
1 ×m(l)
2 is a weight matrix,
and hl
i denotes the hidden embedding of the i-th node. We
also set the scaling constant dij to 1/
p
(di + 1)(dj + 1)
following the GCN model (Kipf & Welling, 2016), where
di and dj are the degrees of node i and j respectively. We
denote the t-th element of the hidden embedding hl
i by hl
i,t.
¯hl
i and var(hl
i) = Vart(hl
i,t) denote the mean and variance
over neurons within hl
i respectively. We use var(hl) to
denote the mean over var(hl
i) of all nodes i. var(hl) is
also termed as the forward variance of the lth layer. Anal-
ogously, the mean over var( ∂Loss
∂hl
i
) of all nodes i, denoted
by var( ∂Loss
∂hl ), is termed as the backward variance of
the lth layer, where Loss refers to a standard cross entropy
objective we assume throughout the paper. Hereinafter we
use variance to denote these two types of variance without
ambiguity.
At initialization, we assume that neurons within hl
i are in-
dependent and identically distributed (i.i.d). The same as-
sumption also applies to elements of W l. Analogously, we
assume that for all neurons t, t′, two certain nodes i, j and a
layer l,
∂hL
j,t′
∂hl
i,t
are i.i.d. We also assume that elements of W l
are independent to elements of W l′
, where l is not equal
to l′. The input features h0
i are random variables and the
following derivations are conditioned on the input features
of the given graph G.
2.2. Classic Initializations Used by GNNs
We denote the (i, j)-th of the weight matrix W l by wl
i,j.
In the following, we remove subscripts (i, j) without caus-
2