On the Initialization of Graph Neural Networks
Table 1. Notation table.
W l Weight matrix of the l-th GNN layer, W l ∈ Rm(l)
1 ×m(l)
2 . W l
ij is denoted by wl
i,j
ˆhl
i, hl
i Embedding of node i at the l-th layer before and after the activation. h0
i is input feature of node i
i, j Node index
t Neuron index
l, L Layer index and number of layers of a GNN
hl
i,t, wl
t1,t2 The t-th element of embedding of node i at l-th layer, and (t1, t2)-th element of W l
dij Re-normalization coefficient between node i and j following the definition of GCN (1)
N, N(i) Set of nodes in G and one-hop neighbors of node i
[hl
i]p
Message propagation path indexed by p. This path has length l and takes i as the destination
node. The set of all such p is denoted as Pi,l
[hl
i]p,t,ϕ
Weight propagation path indexed by ϕ. This path goes along the message propagation path p, is
connected to the t-th neuron of node i and has length l. The set of all such ϕ is denoted as Φi,p,t
δ(h), δ(h) δ(h) is an indicator function of h, which is equal to 1 when h is greater than 0,
and 0 when h is smaller than or equal to 0. δ(h) is a vector, of which elements are δ(h)
⊙, Q
⊙ Element-wise product and cumulative element-wise product
ing ambiguity. Before the model training, elements of the
weight matrix W l are sampled from a probability distri-
bution P (wl), such as a uniform or Gaussian distribution.
The mean of the distribution is typically set to zero, and
thus the variance, denoted by var(wl), determines the form
of the distribution. Classic initialization methods, such as
Xavier and Lecun, tend to stabilize variance across layers
by setting an appropriate var(wl) for all layers. Stabilizing
variance means equating var(hl) for ∀l ∈ 0 · · · L − 1, and
equating var( ∂Loss
∂hl ) for ∀l ∈ 0 · · · L − 1. In the context of
CNNs, hl denotes an element of a flattened feature map of
the lth layer. For example, to stabilize forward variance, Le-
cun, Xavier and Kaiming initialization set var(wl) to 1
3m(l)
1
,
1
m(l)
1
and 2
m(l)
1
respectively. Meanwhile, Xavier and Kaim-
ing initialization set var(wl) to 1
m(l)
2
and 2
m(l)
2
respectively
to stabilize backward variance. Note that Xavier sets the
final var(wl) to the harmonic average of 1
m(l)
1
and 1
m(l)
2
, ob-
taining a trade-off between forward and backward variance
stabilization. Classic initializations might lead to subopti-
mal performance for GNNs though they have been widely
used by modern GNN architectures, since they disregard the
impact of input graph structure and message mechanisms
of GNN on variance. Furthermore, they implicitly assume
that forward outputs and backward gradients of all neurons
within each layer have the same variance. We next derive
new variance expressions that directly take graph structure
into account.
3. Forward and Backward Variance
In this section, we show an overview of derivations that
finally provide analytic expressions of forward variance
of GNNs defined by (1). The backward variance follows
similar derivations. Then we present variance expressions
in terms of var(wl) based on given derivations. Proofs
of theorems and empirical verification of assumptions are
presented in the Appendix A.
Firstly, to simplify subsequent derivations, we adopt a mod-
ification, proposed by (Xu et al., 2018b), to the activation
function in the original GCN formulation (1). Given an
arbitrary vector x, we introduce an indicator function δ(x)
that maps x into a binary vector, where each element is 1 if
the corresponding element in x is greater than 0, and 0 oth-
erwise. z = σ(x) is thereby rewritten by z = δ(x) ⊙ x. In
this paper, we originally intend to investigate the influence
of σ(x) on z. The nesting of the activation function and the
input vector makes such investigation intractable. After the
proposed modification decouples the nesting, we are able
to investigate the influence of δ(x) and x on z separately,
where δ(x) is a simple 0-1 vector. We therefore convert (1)
into the following equations:
ˆhl−1
i =
X
j∈N(i)
dijhl−1
j W l−1
hl
i = δ(ˆhl−1
i ) ⊙ ˆhl−1
i .
(2)
3.1. The First Variance Decomposition
Based on (2), we now decompose the forward variance into
the sum over variance of message propagation paths. As
proposed by (Xu et al., 2018b; Gasteiger et al., 2022), we
can decompose the acyclic GNN computation graph into
a set of message propagation paths from the input to the
l-th layer such that the embedding hl
i can be viewed as
a summation over message propagation paths of length l.
The full details of how we conduct the decomposition are
presented in Appendix C.
3