On the Initialization of Graph Neural Networks
variance expressions of these two theorems, the constants
2, m(k1)
1 , and m(k1)
2 are introduced to mitigate the impact
of the activation function and hidden dimension on vari-
ance, analogous to factors considered by classic methods.
In constrast, the appearance of eA and h0 encapsulate the
innovative part of Virgo, which is taking graph structure,
message passing and input features into account to better
stabilize the variance of GNNs.
5. Experiments
In this section, we conduct experiments to investigate the
performance of Virgo. Firstly, we evaluate several mod-
els on three popular graph tasks, node classification (Sec-
tion 5.1), link prediction (Section 5.2) and graph classi-
fication (Section 5.3), to showcase the performance and
generalizability of Virgo. Then to provide further insights,
we test the variance stability (Section 5.4) of models trained
with Virgo. In experiments below, we conduct hyperparam-
eter sweep to search for best hyperparameter settings. To
be specific, for each hyperparameter setting, we calculate
the mean and standard deviation of 10 trials across differ-
ent random seeds. We iterate over multiple hyperparameter
settings and search for the setting with the best mean on
validation datasets. We then report the mean and standard
deviation on testing datasets with the selected setting as
the final results. All experiments are conducted on a single
Tesla T4 GPU with 16GB memory. Details of experimental
setting are presented in Appendix B
Baseline Initializations We compare Virgo with (i)Lecun
initialization, designed for stabilizing the forward variance
of linear FNNs; (ii) Xavier initialization, for stabilizing both
forward and backward variances of linear FNNs; and (iii)
Kaiming initialization, which proposes two methods that
stabilize either the forward or backward variance of CNNs
activated by ReLU. We denote the two Kaiming variants
as KaiFor and KaiBack, respectively. Similarly, we denote
model initialization following Theorem 4.1 as VirgoFor, and
Theorem 4.2 as VirgoBack, which stabilizes forward and
backward variance respectively.
GNN Architectures We evaluate the model performance on
node classification, link prediction and graph classification
tasks with some classic GNN architectures: (i) GCN (Kipf &
Welling, 2016), a spectral-based GNN for semi-supervised
node classification tasks; (ii) GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al.,
2017), stacking spatial-based convolutions to propagate mes-
sage over graphs; (iii) GIN (Xu et al., 2018a), mitigating the
incapability of GNNs to distinguish different graphs struc-
tures; (iv) NGNN (Song et al., 2021) variants of (i) and (ii),
which deepens GNN models with additional MLP layers
interspersed with graph propagation. Note that with NGNN
variants, we are able to investigate the capability of Virgo ini-
tializations on deeper GNNs more fairly while largely avoid-
ing the effects of over-smoothing and over-squashing on
model performance, i.e., Virgo is not presently designed to
alleviate oversmoothing or oversquashing on deep GNNs. In
practice, Virgo is directly applied to GNN layers of NGNN.
All models are implemented with DGL (Wang et al., 2020)
and PyG (Fey & Lenssen, 2019).
Datasets For node classification, we choose three citation
network datasets (Sen et al., 2008): cora, citeseer, pubmed,
and three OGB (Hu et al., 2020) datasets: ogbn-arxiv, ogbn-
proteins and ogbn-products. For link prediction, we adopt
four OGB datasets: ogbl-ddi, ogbl-collab, ogbl-citation2
and ogbl-ppa. For graph classification, we take three social
network datasests imdb b, imdb m and collab from (Ya-
nardag & Vishwanathan, 2015), and two OGB datasets
ogbg-molhiv and ogbg-molpcba.
5.1. Node Classification
Experimental setting We use DGL to implement GCN
on cora, citeseer and pubmed, and take implementations of
the OGB team on the OGB node classification leaderboard
to implement GCN on ogbn-arxiv and ogbn-proteins, and
GraphSAGE on ogbn-products. We use neighbor sampling
to support mini-batch training of GraphSAGE on ogbn-
products. We tune hyper-parameters as specified previously
and compare model performance of GCN and GraphSAGE
with different initialization methods, including Xavier, Le-
cun, KaiFor, KaiBack, VirgoFor, and VirgoBack. We use
the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer to update train-
able parameters and use early-stop mechanism to reduce the
training time overhead.
Results The evaluation results are presented in Table 2. We
observe that models with Virgo outperform models with
other initializations on 5 out of 6 datasets, the lone excep-
tion being pubmed. And even on pubmed, VirgoFor and
VirgoBack obtain the second and third best performance
among all initializations. Furthermore, models with Virgo
perform well on larger size graphs (ogbn-proteins and ogbn-
products). For example, GCN initialized by Virgo on ogbn-
proteins produces the largest performance gain; specifically,
VirgoBack has 1.04% higher accuracy than the best baseline
initialization method Xavier.
5.2. Link Prediction
Experimental setting We adopt the implementations of the
OGB team on the OGB link prediction leaderboard for GCN
and GraphSAGE, and use DGL to implement their NGNN
variants. We take Xavier and Lecun as baseline initializa-
tions. Baselines on the leaderboard take Xavier or Lecun to
initialize models. We observe that the reported numbers of
many leaderboard submissions of baselines are significantly
lower than model performance with Virgo, which we believe
is in part an artifact of the fact that baselines on the OGB
6