20
normal distribution can be easily generated. Moreover, eﬃcient algorithms for ﬁnding the
square root of positive semideﬁnite matrices are available. We refer to Higham (2008)
for details. As noted in Shao (2010), although the DWB sample with Gaussian weights
may not match non-zero higher-order cumulants of the original process, it is diﬃcult to
choose the joint distribution of Wn that ﬁts those cumulants, and performance of the DWB
primarily depends on the choice of the truncation parameter sn.
In this case, conditionally on Gn, the statistic
√n( ¯Y∗
n− ¯Yn) = 1√n
∑
i∈Nn
Wn,i(Yn,i− ¯Yn)
is also normal with zero mean and variance given in (4.4). Therefore, the conditional
distribution of the DWB counterpart of the test statistic T1,n,
T∗
1,n =√n
 ¯Yn
∗
− ¯Yn

givenGn is known and is the same as the conditional distribution of the asymptotic Gauss-
ian approximation∥Σ∗1/2
n η∥, where η is as v-dimensional standard normal random vector
independent ofGn, and the latter converges C-weakly to∥Σ1/2η∥ by Lemma C.3. A more
interesting case, however, arises when considering the second test statistic T2,n because for
nonlinear transformations the conditional distribution of its bootstrap analog,
T∗
2,n =√n
(
φ( ¯Yn
∗
)− φ( ¯Yn)
)
,
is typically unavailable. Then in the Gaussian case the DWB is consistent without any
further restriction on the topology of the sequence of networks {Gn}. We only need to
assume that√n( ¯Yn− µn) convergesC-weakly to a conditionally normal random vector and
the asymptotic variance of T2,n is a.s. positive.
Proposition 4.4. Suppose that Wn is Gaussian, Assumptions 4.5, 4.6, 4.2, and 4.3 hold.
Then F∗
1,n is conditionally dK-consistent given C. If, in addition, µn converges a.s. to a
C-measurable random vector µ and∇φ(µ)̸= 0 a.s., then F∗
2,n is conditionally dK-consistent
givenC.
Given another choice of Wn, the process{ξn,i := Wn,i(Yn,i− ¯Yn) : i∈ Nn} is sn-dependent
conditionally onGn, i.e., ξn,i and ξn,j are conditionally independent givenGn whenever j /∈
Bn,i := Nn(i; sn + 1). Consequently, in addition to the assumptions of Proposition 4.4, we
need to control the behavior of the third conditional moments ofWn and the neighborhoods
{Bn,i} such that the bootstrap distributions F∗
1,n and F∗
2,n in this case approach ones under
the Gaussian weights as n→∞ .