13
Theorem 3.2. Suppose that the conditions of Lemma 3.1 hold and, in addition, {Sn}
satisfy the independence and continuity conditions of Theorem 3.1. Then F∗
n is conditionally
dK-consistent givenC.
Similarly to the general case, when ξn convergesC-weakly to some random vector ξ
and the sequence of parameters {θn} converges a.s. to a C-measurable random variable θ,
Lemma C.3 implies that T′
n convergesC-weakly to∇φ(θ)⊤ξ. In addition, if the conditional
cdf of the latter is (a.s.) continuous, it satisﬁes assumption (b) of Lemma 3.1.
Corollary 3.2. Suppose that ˆθ∗
n− θ∗
n
C−p
−−→0 a.s., ξ∗
n isC-asymptotically tight and S′ :=
∇φ(θ)⊤ξ satisﬁes the independence and continuity conditions of Corollary 3.1. Then if
(a) ξn→ ξ C-weakly,
(b) θn→ θ a.s. and
(c) dK(T′∗
n , S′|G n,C)
C−p
−−→0 a.s.,
F∗
n is conditionally dK-consistent givenC.
Remark. The assumption regarding convergence of the sequence of parameters {θn} can
be relaxed. In the unconditional case it suﬃces to assume that sup n∥θn∥ <∞. Then
one needs to provide a uniform bound on |P(ξn∈ A)− P(ξ∈ A)|, where A ranges over the
class of half-spaces for a network dependent process similar to that established in Bentkus
(2003). The conditioning on C complicates the problem even more so it falls out of the
scope of this paper.
4. Bootstrap of the Mean
Consider a sequence of network dependent processes {(Yn, Gn)} satisfying Assumptions
2.1, 2.2, and 2.3. As an application of the results given in the preceding section, we
consider the mean of a Yn, µn≡ E[Yn,i|C ] which may vary with n but not across i∈ Nn.9
The parameter of interest µn is estimated using the sample mean ¯Yn which is a consistent
estimator of µn under the assumptions of Theorem 2.1. In this section we provide a number
of resampling based methods for constructing the asymptotically valid conﬁdence sets for
µn. In addition, we establish consistency of a restricted version of thesmooth function model
in which we are interested in φ(µn) for a continuously diﬀerential function φ : Rv→ R.
When the elements of Yn have the same marginal conditional distributions givenC, we may
consider φ(E[f(Yn,1)|C ]), where f : Rv → Rw is a locally Lipschitz function satisfying
(2.2) and the domain of φ is Rw in this case. Since the process {f(Yn,i) : i∈ Nn} is
9It is possible to extend the results of this paper to the case of heterogeneous means as in Gon¸ calves and
White (2002). However, such a setup makes it diﬃcult to isolate the eﬀect of the structure of underlying
networks on the consistency of the proposed bootstrap methods.