The Bootstrap for Network Dependent Processes
Denis Kojevnikov
Tilburg University
Abstract. This paper focuses on the bootstrap for network dependent processes un-
der the conditional ψ-weak dependence. Such processes are distinct from other forms of
random ﬁelds studied in the statistics and econometrics literature so that the existing
bootstrap methods cannot be applied directly. We propose a block-based approach and
a modiﬁcation of the dependent wild bootstrap for constructing conﬁdence sets for the
mean of a network dependent process. In addition, we establish the consistency of these
methods for the smooth function model and provide the bootstrap alternatives to the
network heteroskedasticity-autocorrelation consistent (HAC) variance estimator. We ﬁnd
that the modiﬁed dependent wild bootstrap and the corresponding variance estimator are
consistent under weaker conditions relative to the block-based method, which makes the
former approach preferable for practical implementation.
Keywords. Conditional bootstrap; Block bootstrap; Dependent wild bootstrap; Network
dependent process; Random ﬁeld; Conditional ψ-weak dependence.
1. Introduction
The aim of this paper is developing bootstrap approaches for the sample mean of network
dependent processes studied in Kojevnikov, Marmer, and Song (2020, hereafter KMS). A
network dependent process is a random ﬁeld indexed by the set of nodes of a given undi-
rected network. This network governs the stochastic dependence between the elements
of the associated random ﬁeld. Speciﬁcally, the latter is assumed to satisfy a conditional
version of the ψ-weak dependence condition of Doukhan and Louhichi (1999) given a com-
mon shock of a general form. KMS (2020) show that the pointwise Law of Large Numbers
and the Central Limit Theorem hold for a sequence of such processes under suitable as-
sumptions on the networks’ denseness and the strength of the stochastic dependence. In
E-mail address: D.Kojevnikov@tilburguniversity.edu.
Date: February 1, 2021.
1
arXiv:2101.12312v1  [econ.EM]  28 Jan 2021