21
Proposition 4.5. Suppose that Assumptions 4.5, 4.6, 4.2, and 4.3 hold, and
(4.5) 1
n3/2
∑
i∈Nn
∑
j∈Bn,i
∑
k∈Bn,i∪Bn,j
∏
l∈{i,j,k}
∥Wn,l∥C,3→ 0 a.s.
Then F∗
1,n is conditionally dK-consistent given C. If, in addition, µn converges a.s. to a
C-measurable random vector µ and∇φ(µ)̸= 0 a.s., then F∗
2,n is conditionally dK-consistent
givenC.
Remark. The convergence condition in (4.5) is quite strong. In particular, in a sim-
ple case when the neighborhoods {Bn,i} have the same size ln < n for all n ≥ 1 and
supn,i∈Nn∥Wn,i∥C,3 <∞ a.s., it requires ln = o(n1/4). Therefore, it is of high interest to
ﬁnd a better way to handle network dependent processes under m-dependence.
5. Conclusion
Nonparametric bootstrapping for time series and spatial processes has been extensively
studied in the past decades. Thus, various resampling methods are now available for sta-
tistical analysis of dependent data in these cases. However, the lack of regular structure
in networks renders the use of these techniques for bootstrap-based inference in the case
of network dependent processes impracticable. In this paper we proposed a block-based
method and a variant of the dependent wild bootstrap suitable for the latter processes
satisfying the conditional version of Doukhan and Louhichi (1999)’s ψ-weak dependence
condition. We established the ﬁrst-order validity of these methods to construct conﬁdence
sets for the mean of a network dependent process. In addition, we showed their consistency
under the smooth function model conditionally on a common shock of a general form. Fi-
nally, the corresponding bootstrap variance estimators can be used for asymptotic inference
instead of the network HAC estimator, which is not necessarily positive semi-deﬁnite.
As for the future directions, having a continuity theorem and other related results similar
to ones established in Belyaev and Sj¨ ostedt-de Luna (2000) but under convergence in condi-
tional probability would signiﬁcantly weaken the bootstrap consistency conditions derived
in this paper. In addition, an extension of these methods for bootstrapping M-estimators
and empirical processes is of great importance for applied research.