11
when the statistic Tn is pivotal. However, in the case of a non-pivotal statistic, which is
useful when a consistent estimator of ϑn is hard to obtain or the available estimators
have poor ﬁnite sample properties, the cdfs of {Tn} need not converge. 8 In this case, the
convergence of the Kolmogorov distance between T∗
n and Tn to zero does not necessarily
imply that Fn(c∗
n(α))→ α as n→∞ , where c∗
n(α) is the conditional α-quantile of F∗
n.
Nevertheless, as shown in the next result, a suﬃcient condition for the latter to happen is
the continuity of the cdfs of {Sn}.
Theorem 3.1. Suppose that for all n≥ 1, Sn is conditionally independent of Yn givenC
and the conditional cdf of Sn givenC is (a.s.) continuous. Then if
(a) dK(Tn, Sn|C )→ 0 a.s. and
(b) dK(T∗
n , Sn|G n,C)
C−p
−−→0 a.s.,
dK(T∗
n , Tn|G n,C)
C−p
−−→0 a.s. and
ess sup
α∈(0,1)
|P(Tn≤ c∗
n(α)|C )− α|→ 0 a.s.
Remark. (a) Usually when C ={∅, Ω} and the statistic Tn is pivotal, we have Sn = S∞,
which is the weak limit of Tn. (b) A variant of this result can be found in Chernozhukov
et al. (2013) in the context of Gaussian multiplier bootstrap. (c) Theorem 3.1 also implies
that the conditional quantiles{c∗
n(α) : α∈ (0, 1)} approximate the unconditional quantiles
of Tn because, by the dominated convergence theorem,
sup
α∈(0,1)
|P(Tn≤ c∗
n(α))− α|≤ E ess sup
α∈(0,1)
|P(Tn≤ c∗
n(α)|C )− α|→ 0.
Deﬁnition 3.3. We say that F∗
n is conditionally dK-consistent givenC if the conclusion of
Theorem 3.1 holds.
Typically it is not hard to show that condition (a) of Theorem 3.1 holds (for example,
when the elements ofY∗
n are conditionally i.i.d. givenGn). On contrary, establishing (b) may
be a diﬃcult task, especially when Tn is a nonlinear transformation of Yn in the presence of
stochastic dependence between its elements as in the current framework. However, in the
case when the statistic Tn convergesC-weakly to S and the limiting kernel (i.e., the regular
conditional cdf of S givenC) is continuous, Lemma C.4 implies that this convergence is
equivalent to one with respect to the conditional Kolmogorov distance. In addition, by
Lemma C.3 the almost sure convergence of conditional distributions enjoys a number of
useful properties associated with the usual weak convergence such as the continuous map-
ping theorem, converging together lemma, and the Cram´ er–Wold device. In this situation
we have the following simple corollary.
8Consider, for example, the case of the linearized statistic T ′
n given in (3.1). It does not have a nondegen-
erate weak limit when the sequence of parameters {θn} is not convergent.