2
addition, they provide nonparametric HAC estimators of the variance-covariance matrix
for the vector of sample moments, which is similar to the spatial HAC estimator developed
in Kelejian and Prucha (2007).
These results provide an asymptotic approximation of the distribution of the sample
mean which can be used for inference on the true mean of a network dependent process.
However, this approximation relies on the network HAC estimator which has two major
drawbacks. First, unlike its spatial or time-series counterparts it is not guaranteed to yield
a positive semi-deﬁnite estimate. Second, these estimators are known to have poor ﬁnite
sample properties (see, e.g., Matyas, 1999, Section 3.5). The aim of the current work is to
provide an alternative nonparametric way to conduct inference in these settings.
The nonparametric bootstrap methods for the case of weakly dependent observations
have been studies since the introduction of the non-overlapping block bootstrap in Carl-
stein (1986) and the moving block bootstrap in K¨ unsch (1989) and Liu and Singh (1992)
for stationary, mixing time-series. Since then, a number of block-based methods have been
considered in the statistics literature. They share the idea of resampling groups of consec-
utive observations to capture the stochastic dependence in the original series and include,
among others, the circular block bootstrap (Politis and Romano, 1992), the stationary
bootstrap (Politis and Romano, 1994) and the tapered block bootstrap (Paparoditis and
Politis, 2001). A detailed exposition and comparison of some of these methods can be
found in Lahiri (2003). Block-based bootstrap was also successfully applied to the case
of weakly dependent random ﬁelds satisfying certain mixing conditions (see, e.g., Lahiri,
2003, Section 12 and references therein).
More recent developments in this area of research are discussed in Gon¸ calves and Politis
(2011). In particular, the dependent wild bootstrap proposed in B¨ uhlmann (1993) and
Shao (2010) departs from other methods. Instead of using blocks, it tries to mimic the
autocovariance structure of the original data by introducing auxiliary random variables
and can be applied to irregularly spaced data. A related method, the dependent random
weighting, was recently introduced in Sengupta, Shao, and Wang (2015) and has wider
applicability; speciﬁcally, it can be directly applied to irregularly spaced spatial data.
Another useful resampling technique developed for stationary and nonstationary times-
series and homogenous random ﬁelds under mixing is subsampling. A comprehensive treat-
ment of this method is given in Politis, Romano, and Wolf (1999). Interestingly, in the
time-series case subsampling is similar to the moving block bootstrap where a single block
is resampled. Finally, it is worth mentioning the spatial smoothed bootstrap suggested
in Garcia-Soidan, Menezes, and Rubinos (2014). In this instance, assuming homogeneity
of the underlying data generating process, bootstrap pseudo-samples are drawn from the
estimated joint distribution of a given sample.