3
Network dependent processes are closely related to random ﬁelds indexed by elements
of a lattice in Rd (see, e.g., Comets and Janˇ zura, 1998; Conley, 1999). However, they are
not a special case of the latter and so the existing bootstrap methods cannot be directly
applied to our framework. The main reason for that is the irregularity of the structure
of underlying networks. In particular, subsampling and all types of the block bootstrap
for time-series and spatial data rely on the existence of ordered blocks of closely-located
observations. The dependent wild bootstrap uses a well-known property of kernel functions
that guarantees the positive semi-deﬁniteness of certain weighting matrices. However, as
argued in KMS (2020), this relation does not necessarily hold when applied to networks.
Finally, the homogeneity assumption of the spatial smoothed bootstrap and the spatial
subsampling, that is the invariance of joint distributions under spatial shifts is not suitable
for our case.
We propose two bootstrap approaches for constructing asymptotically valid conﬁdence
sets for the mean of a network dependent process and establish the ﬁrst-order consistency
of these methods for smooth functions of means conditionally on the common shock. The
ﬁrst approach is a block-based method in which blocks are constructed from certain neigh-
borhoods of each node in a network. The second is a modiﬁcation of the dependent wild
bootstrap that employs the topology of a given graph to generate random weights instead
of using a ﬁxed kernel function. In addition, we provide the bootstrap variance estima-
tors of the scaled sample mean which yield positive semi-deﬁnite estimates and can be
used as an alternative to the network HAC estimator. We ﬁnd that the consistency of the
modiﬁed dependent wild bootstrap and the corresponding variance estimator holds under
weaker conditions as compared with the block bootstrap. However, the bootstrap distri-
bution corresponding to the former method may fail to match the higher-order cumulants
of the underlying data generating process, thus preventing improvements over asymptotic
approximations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes a modiﬁcation
of network dependent processes allowing for weighted networks. This modiﬁcation can
be useful for handling dense graphs once varying intensity of links is assumed. Section
3 provides some general result regarding the conditional bootstrap. Speciﬁcally, we use
the almost sure convergence of probability kernels to ensure that the bootstrap is valid for
(almost) every realization of the common shock, which may also represent the stochastic
network formation process. In Section 4 we present the above-mentioned bootstrap methods
in detail and establish suﬃcient conditions for their conditional consistency. All the proofs
and other technical details are presented in the Appendices A-C.