Similarity of Neural Network Representations Revisited
Problem Statement
Let X ∈ Rn×p1 denote a matrix of activations of p1 neu-
rons for n examples, and Y ∈ Rn×p2 denote a matrix of
activations of p2 neurons for the same n examples. We
assume that these matrices have been preprocessed to center
the columns. Without loss of generality we assume that
p1 ≤ p2. We are concerned with the design and analysis of
a scalar similarity index s(X, Y ) that can be used to com-
pare representations within and across neural networks, in
order to help visualize and understand the effect of different
factors of variation in deep learning.
2. What Should Similarity Be Invariant To?
This section discusses the invariance properties of similarity
indexes and their implications for measuring similarity of
neural network representations. We argue that both intuitive
notions of similarity and the dynamics of neural network
training call for a similarity index that is invariant to orthog-
onal transformation and isotropic scaling, but not invertible
linear transformation.
2.1. Invariance to Invertible Linear Transformation
A similarity index is invariant to invertible linear transfor-
mation if s(X, Y )=s (XA, Y B ) for any full rank A and
B. If activations X are followed by a fully-connected layer
f (X)=σ (XW + β), then transforming the activations
by a full rank matrix A as X′ = XA and transforming the
weights by the inverse A−1 as W ′ = A−1W preserves the
output of f (X). This transformation does not appear to
change how the network operates, so intuitively, one might
prefer a similarity index that is invariant to invertible linear
transformation, as argued by Raghu et al. (2017).
However, a limitation of invariance to invertible linear trans-
formation is that any invariant similarity index gives the
same result for any representation of width greater than or
equal to the dataset size, i.e. p2 ≥ n. We provide a simple
proof in Appendix A.
Theorem 1. Let X and Y be n × p matrices. Suppose s
is invariant to invertible linear transformation in the ﬁrst
argument, i.e. s(X, Z)= s(XA, Z ) for arbitrary Z and
any A with rank(A)= p. If rank(X)= rank(Y )= n, then
s(X, Z)= s(Y, Z).
There is thus a practical problem with invariance to invert-
ible linear transformation: Some neural networks, especially
convolutional networks, have more neurons in some layers
than there are examples the training dataset (Springenberg
et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2018; Zagoruyko & Komodakis,
2016). It is somewhat unnatural that a similarity index
could require more examples than were used for training.
A deeper issue is that neural network training is not invari-
Figure 1. First principal components of representations of net-
works trained from different random initializations are similar.
Each example from the CIFAR-10 test set is shown as a dot col-
ored according to the value of the ﬁrst two principal components of
an intermediate layer of one network (left) and plotted on the ﬁrst
two principal components of the same layer of an architecturally
identical network trained from a different initialization (right).
ant to arbitrary invertible linear transformation of inputs
or activations. Even in the linear case, gradient descent
converges ﬁrst along the eigenvectors corresponding to the
largest eigenvalues of the input covariance matrix (LeCun
et al., 1991), and in cases of overparameterization or early
stopping, the solution reached depends on the scale of the
input. Similar results hold for gradient descent training
of neural networks in the inﬁnite width limit (Jacot et al.,
2018). The sensitivity of neural networks training to linear
transformation is further demonstrated by the popularity of
batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015).
Invariance to invertible linear transformation implies that the
scale of directions in activation space is irrelevant. Empiri-
cally, however, scale information is both consistent across
networks and useful across tasks. Neural networks trained
from different random initializations develop representa-
tions with similar large principal components, as shown in
Figure 1. Consequently, Euclidean distances between ex-
amples, which depend primarily upon large principal com-
ponents, are similar across networks. These distances are
meaningful, as demonstrated by the success of perceptual
loss and style transfer (Gatys et al., 2016; Johnson et al.,
2016; Dumoulin et al., 2017). A similarity index that is
invariant to invertible linear transformation ignores this as-
pect of the representation, and assigns the same score to
networks that match only in large principal components or
networks that match only in small principal components.
2.2. Invariance to Orthogonal Transformation
Rather than requiring invariance to any invertible linear
transformation, one could require a weaker condition; in-
variance to orthogonal transformation, i.e. s(X, Y )=
s(XU, Y V ) for full-rank orthonormal matrices U and V
such that UTU = I and V TV = I.