Similarity of Neural Network Representations Revisited
Indexes invariant to orthogonal transformations do not share
the limitations of indexes invariant to invertible linear trans-
formation. When p2 > n, indexes invariant to orthogonal
transformation remain well-deﬁned. Moreover, orthogo-
nal transformations preserve scalar products and Euclidean
distances between examples.
Invariance to orthogonal transformation seems desirable for
neural networks trained by gradient descent. Invariance to
orthogonal transformation implies invariance to permuta-
tion, which is needed to accommodate symmetries of neural
networks (Chen et al., 1993; Orhan & Pitkow, 2018). In
the linear case, orthogonal transformation of the input does
not affect the dynamics of gradient descent training (LeCun
et al., 1991), and for neural networks initialized with rota-
tionally symmetric weight distributions, e.g. i.i.d. Gaussian
weight initialization, training with ﬁxed orthogonal trans-
formations of activations yields the same distribution of
training trajectories as untransformed activations, whereas
an arbitrary linear transformation would not.
Given a similarity index s(·,·) that is invariant to orthog-
onal transformation, one can construct a similarity index
s′(·,·) that is invariant to any invertible linear transforma-
tion by ﬁrst orthonormalizing the columns of X and Y ,
and then applying s(·,·). Given thin QR decompositions
X =QARA andY =QBRB one can construct a similarity
indexs′(X,Y ) =s(QX,QY ), wheres′(·,·) is invariant to
invertible linear transformation because orthonormal bases
with the same span are related to each other by orthonormal
transformation (see Appendix B).
2.3. Invariance to Isotropic Scaling
We expect similarity indexes to be invariant to isotropic scal-
ing, i.e.s(X,Y ) = s(αX,βY ) for anyα,β ∈ R+. That
said, a similarity index that is invariant to both orthogonal
transformation and non-isotropic scaling, i.e. rescaling of
individual features, is invariant to any invertible linear trans-
formation. This follows from the existence of the singular
value decomposition of the transformation matrix. Gener-
ally, we are interested in similarity indexes that are invariant
to isotropic but not necessarily non-isotropic scaling.
3. Comparing Similarity Structures
Our key insight is that instead of comparing multivariate
features of an example in the two representations (e.g.via re-
gression), one can ﬁrst measure the similarity between every
pair of examples in each representation separately, and then
compare the similarity structures. In neuroscience, such
matrices representing the similarities between examples
are called representational similarity matrices (Kriegesko-
rte et al., 2008a). We show below that, if we use an inner
product to measure similarity, the similarity between repre-
sentational similarity matrices reduces to another intuitive
notion of pairwise feature similarity.
Dot Product-Based Similarity. A simple formula relates
dot products between examples to dot products between
features:
⟨vec(XX T), vec(YY T)⟩ = tr(XX TYY T) =||Y TX||2
F.
(1)
The elements ofXX T andYY T are dot products between
the representations of the ith and jth examples, and indi-
cate the similarity between these examples according to the
respective networks. The left-hand side of (1) thus mea-
sures the similarity between the inter-example similarity
structures. The right-hand side yields the same result by
measuring the similarity between features from
X andY ,
by summing the squared dot products between every pair.
Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion. Equation 1
implies that, for centeredX andY :
1
(n− 1)2 tr(XX TYY T) =||cov(XT,Y T)||2
F. (2)
The Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (Gretton et al.,
2005) generalizes Equations 1 and 2 to inner products
from reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces, where the squared
Frobenius norm of the cross-covariance matrix becomes
the squared Hilbert-Schmidt norm of the cross-covariance
operator. LetKij =k(xi, xj) andLij =l(yi, yj) wherek
andl are two kernels. The empirical estimator of HSIC is:
HSIC(K,L ) = 1
(n− 1)2 tr(KHLH ), (3)
whereH is the centering matrix Hn = In− 1
n 11T. For
linear kernelsk(x, y) =l(x, y) = xTy, HSIC yields (2).
Gretton et al. (2005) originally proposed HSIC as a test
statistic for determining whether two sets of variables are
independent. They prove that the empirical estimator con-
verges to the population value at a rate of 1/√n, and Song
et al. (2007) provide an unbiased estimator. When k and
l are universal kernels, HSIC = 0 implies independence,
but HSIC is not an estimator of mutual information. HSIC
is equivalent to maximum mean discrepancy between the
joint distribution and the product of the marginal distribu-
tions, and HSIC with a speciﬁc kernel family is equivalent
to distance covariance (Sejdinovic et al., 2013).
Centered Kernel Alignment. HSIC is not invariant to
isotropic scaling, but it can be made invariant through nor-
malization. This normalized index is known as centered ker-
nel alignment (Cortes et al., 2012; Cristianini et al., 2002):
CKA(K,L ) = HSIC(K,L )√
HSIC(K,K )HSIC(L,L)
. (4)