Sidak Pal Singh, Martin Jaggi
Overall, the application of Wasserstein barycenters for
averaging the weights of neural networks has—to our
knowledge—not been considered in the past.
3 Background on Optimal Transport
We present a short background summary on optimal
transport (OT) in the discrete case, and in this process
set up the notation for the rest of the paper. OT
gives a way to compare two probability distributions
deﬁned over a ground spaceS, provided an underlying
distance or more generally the cost of transporting one
point to another in the ground space. Essentially, it
lifts a distance between points to a distance between
distributions. Next, we describe the linear program
which lies at the heart of OT.
LinearProgramFormulation. First, letusconsider
two empirical probability measuresµA andµB denoted
by a weighted sum of Diracs, i.e.,µA =∑nA
i=1αi δ(s(i)
A )
andµB =∑nB
i=1βi δ(s(i)
B ). Hereδ(s) denotes the Dirac
(unit mass) distribution at points ∈ S and the set
of pointsS = (s(1),..., s(n)) ∈ Sn. The weightα =
(α1,...,α nA
) lives in the probability simplexΣnA
:={
p ∈ R
nA
+ | ∑nA
i=1pi = 1
}
(and similarlyβ). Further,
let Cij denote the ground cost of moving points(i)
tos(j). Then the optimal transport betweenµA and
µB can be formulated as ﬁnding the solution to the
following linear program.
OT(µA,µB;C) := min
T∈R
(nA×nB )
+
s.t. T 1nB =α,T⊤1nA =β
⟨T,C⟩ (1)
Where, ⟨T,C⟩ := tr
(
T⊤C
)
= ∑
ijTijCij is the
Frobenius inner product of matrices. The optimal
T ∈ R
(nA×nB )
+ is called as thetransportation matrixor
transport map, andTij represents the optimal amount
of mass to be moved from points(i) to points(j). An
intuitive example where this holds is the problem of
moving a given amount of goods, like bread, from cer-
tain bakeries to meet the demands at some cafes, such
that the overall transportation cost is minimal.
Wasserstein Distance. In the case whereS = Rd
and the cost is deﬁned with respect to a metricDS
over S
(
i.e., Cij = DS(s(i),s(j))p for any i,j
)
, OT
establishes a distance between empirical probability
distributions. This is called thep-Wasserstein distance
and is deﬁned asWp(µA,µB) := OT(µA,µB;Dp
S)1/p.
Wasserstein Barycenters. This represents the no-
tion of averaging in the Wasserstein space. To be
precise, the Wasserstein barycenter Agueh and Car-
lier (2011) is a probability measure that minimizes the
weighted sum of (p-th power) Wasserstein distances
to the givenN measures {µA1,...,µ AN }, with corre-
sponding weightsη = {η1,...,η N } ∈ ΣN. Hence, the
Wasserstein barycenter can be written as
Bp(µA1,...,µ AN ) = arg min
µ
N∑
i=1
ηiWp(µ,µAi)p. (2)
Regularization. The solution to Eq. (1) lies at
the extreme points of the polyhedra corresponding
to this linear program. However, computing this ex-
actly is expensive and scales in about O(n3 log(n))
(n being the cardinality of the support of the mea-
sures) when using network simplex or interior point
methods. A common way to tackle this nowadays, is
to consider the entropy regularized Wasserstein dis-
tance, Wp,λ(µA,µB) := OTλ(µA,µB;Dp
S)1/p, follow-
ing Cuturi (2013). Here the search space for the
optimalT is instead restricted to a smooth solution
close to the extreme points of the linear program by
subtracting λH(T ) from the linear objective, where
H(T ) = −∑
ijTij logTij.
Sinkhorn iterations. The regularized problem
is then solved eﬃciently using Sinkhorn iterations
(Sinkhorn, 1964). Although the cost of each Sinkhorn it-
erationisquadraticin n, ithasbeenshowninAltschuler
et al. (2017) that convergence can be attained in a num-
ber of iterations which is independent ofn. This results
in overall complexity of˜O(n2). Also, these iterations
which mostly consist of matrix-vector products are
further amenable to GPU acceleration.
4 Proposed Algorithm
In this section, we discuss our proposed algorithm for
model aggregation. Without loss of generality, we
consider that we are averaging the parameters of only
two neural networks. For now, we ignore the bias
parameters and we only focus on the weights. This
is to make the presentation succinct, and it can be
easily extended to the case of multiple models and
incorporating the bias parameters.
Motivation. As alluded to earlier in the introduc-
tion, the problem with vanilla averaging of parameters
is the lack of one-to-one correspondence between the
structures of the models. In particular, for a given
layer, there is no direct matching between the neurons
of the two neural networks. For example, this means
that thekth neuron of the model A might behave very
diﬀerently (in terms of its activation response to input
data) from thekth neuron of the other model B and
instead might be quite similar to thek + 1th neuron.
Imagine if we would knew a perfect matching between
the neurons, then we could simply align the neurons