Model F usion via Optimal T ransport
layer-wise averaging scheme can be interpreted as com-
puting the Wasserstein barycenter (Agueh and Carlier,
2011; Cuturi and Doucet, 2014) of the weight vectors
of each layer of the parent models.
We empirically demonstrate that our method succeeds
in one-shot merging of networks of diﬀerent weights,
and in all scenarios signiﬁcantly outperforms vanilla
weight averaging. Our experiments cover standard
image classiﬁcation datasets, MNIST and CIFAR10,
for neural networks such as multi-layer perceptrons
(MLPs)andconvolutionalneuralnetworks(CNNs)such
as VGG11 (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014).
More surprisingly, we also show that our method suc-
ceeds in merging two networks that were trained for
slightly diﬀerent tasks (such as using a diﬀerent set of
labels). The method is able to “inherit” new abilities
unique to one of the parent networks, while outperform-
ing the same parent network on the task associated
with the other network.
Extensions and Applications.Our techniques are
straight-forward to extend to the case of merging more
than two parent networks. Also, while we require the
overall number of layers to be identical, we do allow
corresponding layers between the several networks to
be of diﬀerent sizes.
The method provides a new building block for enabling
several use-cases. This includes for example 1) the
personalization of a global model to personal additional
training data, including cases where the global model
is very costly to train. 2) Federated or decentralized
learningapplications, wheretrainingdataisnotallowed
to be shared due to privacy reasons or simply due to
its large size. Having a more powerful model averaging
technique such as ours might improve model exchange
and reduce communication requirements.
2 Related Work
Ensemble methods. Model ensembling—that is the
combination of the outputs of several trained models—
has long been in use in deep learning and machine learn-
ing in general (Breiman, 1996; Wolpert, 1992; Schapire,
1999). While known to improve robustness and often
accuracy, in our scenario it is assumed infeasible to
maintain and run several trained models.
Distillation. Besides prediction-based ensembling, an-
other line of work by Hinton et al. (2015); Buciluˇ a et al.
(2006); Schmidhuber (1992) proposes distillation tech-
niques. Here the key idea is to employ the knowledge
of a pre-trained teacher network (typically larger and
and expensive to train) and transfer its abilities to a
smaller model called the student network. During this
transfer process or distillation, the goal is to utilize the
relative probabilities of misclassiﬁcation of the teacher
as a more informative training signal for the student
network.
While distillation also results in a single model, a main
drawback is its computational complexity—the distilla-
tion process is essentially as expensive as training the
student network from scratch, and also involves its own
set of hyper-parameter tuning. In addition, distillation
still requires the availability of (unlabelled) training
data, which we avoid here.
In a diﬀerent line of work, Shen et al. (2018) have
come up with approaches building upon a Generative
AdversarialNetwork(Goodfellowetal.,2014)wherethe
student network is forced to produce outputs mimicking
the teacher networks. This still does not resolve this
problem of the high computational cost involved in
this kind of knowledge transfer. Moreover, it does not
provide a principled way to aggregate the parameters of
diﬀerent models, something we provide via our method.
Relation to other network fusion methods.Sev-
eral studies have investigated a method to merge two
trained networks into a single network without the need
of retraining (Smith and Gashler, 2017; Utans, 1996;
Leontev et al., 2018). Leontev et al. (2018) proposed us-
ing Elastic Weight Consolidation, which formulates an
assignment problem on top of the diagonal approxima-
tions to the Hessian matrices of each of the two parent
neural networks. Their proposed method however only
works when the weights of the parent models are al-
ready close, i.e. share a signiﬁcant part of the training
history (Smith and Gashler, 2017; Utans, 1996), by
relying on SGD with periodic averaging, also known as
local SGD (Stich, 2019). The shown performance in
experiments by Leontev et al. (2018) nevertheless was
not improved over vanilla averaging.
Wasserstein barycenters. Optimal transport has
recently received a lot of interest in machine learning
applications, since the entropic regularization intro-
duced by Cuturi (2013), which has made it more viable
for practical use. The notion of Wasserstein barycen-
ter was introduced by Agueh and Carlier (2011) and
a regularized variant was presented by Cuturi and
Doucet (2014). In the past, Wasserstein barycenters
have been mainly used in problems concerning clus-
tering (Cuturi and Doucet, 2014), Bayesian averaging
(Backhoﬀ-Veraguas et al., 2018), sentence representa-
tions (Singh et al., 2018), graphics (Solomon et al.,
2015), and more.
Recently, Dognin et al. (2019) used Wasserstein
barycenters to average predictions, as in ensembling,
for multi-label or multi-class settings. However, this
is orthogonal to our work, as we are concerned with
obtaining one single model, in contrast to ensembling.