updates(AU) in MTL and observe that existing MTL meth-
ods still suffer from task dominance.
(2) We propose a Task-aware Adaptive Learning Rate method
(AdaTask) to separate the accumulative gradients of each
task during optimization in the MTL models.
(3) Extensive experiments on the synthetic and three public
datasets from the CV and recommendation demonstrate
that AdaTask signiﬁcantly improves the performance of
the dominated task(s), while achieving SOTA average
task-wise performance. Analysis shows that AdaTask bal-
ances parameters in all shared layers well.
Related Work
Multi-Task Learning Architecture.Shared Bottom (Caru-
ana 1997) is the most basic and commonly used MTL struc-
ture. With hard parameters shared across tasks, it suffers
from the negative transfer. Cross-stitch network (Misra et al.
2016) and Sluice network (Ruder et al. 2019) were proposed
to learn weights of linear combinations to fuse representa-
tions from different tasks selectively. However, the weights
for different tasks are static for all samples. MOE (Shazeer
et al. 2017) ﬁrst proposed to share some experts at the bottom
and combine experts through a gating network. MMOE (Ma
et al. 2018a) extends MOE to utilize different gates for each
task to obtain different fusing weights in MTL. Similarly,
MRAN (Zhao et al. 2019) applied multi-head self-attention
to learn different representation subspaces for different fea-
ture sets. PLE (Tang et al. 2020) develops both shared experts
and task-speciﬁc experts, together with a progressive routing
mechanism to further improve learning efﬁciency. In addition,
there have been some studies of the adaptive selection of lay-
ers or neurons instead of experts. AdaShare (Sun et al. 2020)
selects some layers for each task from multiple shared layers.
TAAN (Liu et al. 2020) adopts a task adaptive activation
network to enable ﬂexible and low-cost MTL. MTAN (Liu,
Johns, and Davison 2019) uses the attention mechanism to
extract the feature representation corresponding to the task
from the shared backbone. In contrast to the above, which
focuses on the shared module design, some works explicitly
accomplish knowledge transfer between tasks at the output
layer. ESSM (Ma et al. 2018b) models the sequential pattern
impression of→ click→ conversion. CrossDistil (Yang et al.
2022) proposes to enhance knowledge transfer between tasks
through distillation.
Multi-Task and Multi-Objective Optimization. There are
also many MTL works to revolve negative transfer by either
balancing the gradients of all tasks (Kendall, Gal, and Cipolla
2018; Liu, Johns, and Davison 2019; Liu, Liang, and Gitter
2019; Chen et al. 2018) or avoiding gradient conﬂicts (Yu
et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2021). UW (Kendall,
Gal, and Cipolla 2018) calculates the weights based on ho-
moscedastic uncertainty, while DW A (Liu, Johns, and Davi-
son 2019) and LBTW (Liu, Liang, and Gitter 2019) are based
on the rate of change of loss for each task. GradNorm (Chen
et al. 2018) proposed adding a regularization term to the
loss function to balance the training rates of all tasks. Gra-
dientSurgery (Yu et al. 2020) proposes gradient surgery to
avoid interference between task gradients. GradDrop (Chen
et al. 2020) samples gradients based on their level of consis-
tency. CAGrad (Liu et al. 2021) seeks the gradient update
direction by maximizing the task with the least loss reduction.
In addition, some works formulate multi-task learning as a
multi-objective optimization problem and seek discrete or
continuous Pareto optimal solutions (Sener and Koltun 2018;
Ma, Du, and Matusik 2020; Xie et al. 2021). Finally, some
works in MTL attempt to balance the interference of auxiliary
tasks with the main task (Lin et al. 2019a; Navon et al. 2021;
He et al. 2022).
Rethinking Task Dominance in MTL
In this section, we want to answer the following questions:
(RQ1) How can we quantify the task dominance of a parame-
ter in MTL models? (RQ2) To what existing do exist MTL
approaches tackle the task dominance issue? (RQ3) How
does task dominance impact the training of MTL models?
Synthetic Dataset Setting
To answer the above research questions, we generate a syn-
thetic MTL dataset with two regression tasks, following Grad-
Norm (Chen et al. 2018). Speciﬁcally, the ground truth for
taskk∈{A,B} is obtained as follows:
yk(x) = Wk
1 x + Wk
2 x2 + W3x3 +ϵ, (1)
where WA
1 and WA
2 are constant matrices with elements
sampled from N (1, 1), WB
1 , WB
2 and W3 are constant
matrices with elements sampled from N (10, 10), and ϵ is
a Gaussian noise sampled from N (0, 0.1). Note that WB
1 ,
WB
2 is roughly ten times as much as WA
1 and WA
2 , making
the dataset dominated by task B. Moreover, x∈ R250 and
yk(x)∈ R100. The MTL model is a 4-layer fully connected
neural network with ELU (Clevert, Unterthiner, and Hochre-
iter 2016) as the activation function. We use the RMSProp
optimizer for parameter optimization.
(RQ1) How can we quantify the task dominance of
parameters in MTL model?
We quantify the task dominance of a parameter by dividing
the accumulative updates from the corresponding task by the
overall updates from all tasks for this parameter. Here we
choose the exponentially decaying Average of the squared
Updates (AU) to measure the accumulative updates, another
choice may also be feasible. Note that we mainly focus on
the shared parameters rather than the task-speciﬁc parameters
since the latter is designed to be only updated and therefore
dominated by the corresponding task.
Given a shared parameterθi, the AU at stept from taskk
is deﬁned as:
AU(i,t,k ):=G
[
∆θ2]k
t,i =γG
[
∆θ2]k
t−1,i+(1−γ)[∆θk
t,i]2 (2)
where ∆θk
t,i denotes the update of parameterθi at setpt from
taskk. In RMSProp, ∆θk
t,i =− η√
Gt,i+ϵgk
t,i.
The dominance of task k on a parameter i at step t can
therefore be deﬁned as the ratio of its AU over the total AU