Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Table 11: (Top) Test accuracy (%) of a model trained centrally with various optimizers. (Bottom)
Average test accuracy (%) over the last 100 rounds of various federated optimizers on the EMNIST
CR task, using constant learning rates or theEXPDECAY schedule forηl. Accuracies (for the federated
tasks) within 0.5% of the best result are shown in bold.
ADAGRAD ADAM YOGI SGDM SGD
CENTRALIZED 88.0 87.9 88.0 87.7 87.7
FED... A DAGRAD ADAM YOGI AVGM A VG
CONSTANT ηl 85.1 85.6 85.5 85.2 84.9
EXPDECAY 85.3 86.2 86.2 85.8 85.2
F C REATING A FEDERATED CIFAR-100
Overview We use the Pachinko Allocation Method (PAM) (Li & McCallum, 2006) to create a
federated CIFAR-100. PAM is a topic modeling method in which the correlations between individual
words in a vocabulary are represented by a rooted directed acyclic graph (DAG) whose leaves are the
vocabulary words. The interior nodes are topics with Dirichlet distributions over their child nodes.
To generate a document, we sample multinomial distributions from each interior node’s Dirichlet
distribution. To sample a word from the document, we begin at the root, and draw a child node its
multinomial distribution, and continue doing this until we reach a leaf node.
To partition CIFAR-100 across clients, we use the label structure of CIFAR-100. Each image in
the dataset has a ﬁne label (often referred to as its label) which is a member of a coarse label. For
example, the ﬁne label “seal” is a member of the coarse label “aquatic mammals”. There are 20
coarse labels in CIFAR-100, each with 5 ﬁne labels. We represent this structure as a DAGG, with a
root whose children are the coarse labels. Each coarse label is an interior node whose child nodes are
its ﬁne labels. The root node has a symmetric Dirichlet distribution with parameterα over the coarse
labels, and each coarse label has a symmetric Dirichlet distribution with parameterβ.
We associate each client to a document. That is, we draw a multinomial distribution from the Dirichlet
prior at the root (Dir(α)) and a multinomial distribution from the Dirichlet prior at each coarse label
(Dir(β)). To create the client dataset, we draw leaf nodes from this DAG using Pachinko allocation,
randomly sample an example with the given ﬁne label, and assign it to the client’s dataset. We do this
100 times for each of 500 distinct training clients.
While more complex than LDA, this approach creates more realistic heterogeneity among client
datasets by creating correlations between label frequencies for ﬁne labels within the same coarse
label set. Intuitively, if a client’s dataset has many images of dolphins, they are likely to also have
pictures of whales. By using a smallα at the root, client datasets become more likely to focus on a
few coarse labels. By using a largerβ for the coarse-to-ﬁne label distributions, clients are more likely
to have multiple ﬁne labels from the same coarse label.
One important note: Once we sample a ﬁne label, we randomly select an element with that label
without replacement. This ensures no two clients have overlapping examples. In more detail, suppose
we have sample a ﬁne labely with coarse labelc for clientm, and there is only one remaining such
example (x,c,y ). We assign (x,c,y ) to clientm’s dataset, and remove the leaf nodey from the DAG
G. We also removey from the multinomial distribution θc that client m has associated to coarse
labelc, which we refer to as renormalization with respect toy (Algorithm 8). Ifi has no remaining
children after pruning nodej, we also remove nodei fromG and re-normalize the root multinomial
θr with respect toc. For all subsequent clients, we draw multinomials from this prunedG according
to symmetric Dirichlet distributions with the same parameters as before, but with one fewer category.
Notation and method LetC denote the set of coarse labels andY the set of ﬁne labels, and letS
denote the CIFAR-100 dataset. This consists of examples (x,c,y ) wherex is an image vector,c∈C
is a coarse label set, andy∈Y is a ﬁne label withy∈c. Forc∈C ,y∈Y , we letSc andSy denote
the set of examples inS with coarse labelc and ﬁne labely. Forv∈G we let|G[v]| denote the set
of children ofv inG. Forγ∈ R, let Dir(γ,k ) denote the symmetric Dirichlet distribution with k
categories.
37