Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
ADAPTIVE FEDERATED OPTIMIZATION
Sashank J. Reddi∗, Zachary Charles∗, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush,
Jakub Koneˇcný, Sanjiv Kumar, H. Brendan McMahan
Google Research
{sashank, zachcharles, manzilzaheer, zachgarrett, krush,
konkey, sanjivk, mcmahan}@google.com
ABSTRACT
Federated learning is a distributed machine learning paradigm in which a large
number of clients coordinate with a central server to learn a model without sharing
their own training data. Standard federated optimization methods such as Fed-
erated Averaging (FEDAVG) are often difﬁcult to tune and exhibit unfavorable
convergence behavior. In non-federated settings, adaptive optimization methods
have had notable success in combating such issues. In this work, we propose fed-
erated versions of adaptive optimizers, including ADAGRAD , ADAM, and YOGI,
and analyze their convergence in the presence of heterogeneous data for general
nonconvex settings. Our results highlight the interplay between client heterogeneity
and communication efﬁciency. We also perform extensive experiments on these
methods and show that the use of adaptive optimizers can signiﬁcantly improve the
performance of federated learning.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Federated learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm in which multiple clients cooperate to learn
a model under the orchestration of a central server (McMahan et al., 2017). In FL, raw client data
is never shared with the server or other clients. This distinguishes FL from traditional distributed
optimization, and requires contending with heterogeneous data. FL has two primary settings, cross-
silo (eg. FL between large institutions) and cross-device (eg. FL across edge devices) (Kairouz et al.,
2019, Table 1). In cross-silo FL, most clients participate in every round and can maintain state
between rounds. In the more challenging cross-device FL, our primary focus, only a small fraction of
clients participate in each round, and clients cannot maintain state across rounds. For a more in-depth
discussion of FL and the challenges involved, we defer to Kairouz et al. (2019) and Li et al. (2019a).
Standard optimization methods, such as distributed SGD, are often unsuitable in FL and can incur
high communication costs. To remedy this, many federated optimization methods use local client
updates, in which clients update their models multiple times before communicating with the server.
This can greatly reduce the amount of communication required to train a model. One such method is
FEDAVG (McMahan et al., 2017), in which clients perform multiple epochs of SGD on their local
datasets. The clients communicate their models to the server, which averages them to form a new
global model. While FEDAVG has seen great success, recent works have highlighted its convergence
issues in some settings (Karimireddy et al., 2019; Hsu et al., 2019). This is due to a variety of factors
including (1) client drift (Karimireddy et al., 2019), where local client models move away from
globally optimal models, and (2) a lack of adaptivity. FEDAVG is similar in spirit to SGD, and may
be unsuitable for settings with heavy-tail stochastic gradient noise distributions, which often arise
when training language models (Zhang et al., 2019a). Such settings beneﬁt from adaptive learning
rates, which incorporate knowledge of past iterations to perform more informed optimization.
In this paper, we focus on the second issue and present a simple framework for incorporating
adaptivity in FL. In particular, we propose a general optimization framework in which (1) clients
perform multiple epochs of training using a client optimizer to minimize loss on their local data and
(2) server updates its global model by applying a gradient-basedserver optimizer to the average of the
clients’ model updates. We show that FEDAVG is the special case where SGD is used as both client
and server optimizer and server learning rate is 1. This framework can also seamlessly incorporate
∗Authors contributed equally to this work
1
arXiv:2003.00295v5  [cs.LG]  8 Sep 2021