Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Algorithm 5 FEDADAGRADFEDADAGRADFEDADAGRAD , FEDYOGIFEDYOGIFEDYOGI , and FEDADAMFEDADAMFEDADAM - Batched data
Input:x0,v−1≥τ 2, optionalβ1,β 2∈ [0, 1) for FEDYOGI and FEDADAM
fort = 0,··· ,T − 1 do
Sample a subsetS of clients
xt
i =xt
for each clienti∈S in parallel do
fore = 1,...,E do
forb∈B i do
xt
i =xt
i−ηl∇fi(xt
i;b)
∆t
i =xt
i−xt
n = ∑
i∈Sni, ∆t = ∑
i∈S
ni
n ∆t
i
mt =β1mt−1 + (1−β1)∆t
vt =vt−1 + ∆2
t (FEDADAGRAD )(FEDADAGRAD )(FEDADAGRAD )
vt =vt−1− (1−β2)∆2
t sign(vt−1− ∆2
t ) (FEDYOGI)(FEDYOGI)(FEDYOGI)
vt =β2vt−1 + (1−β2)∆2
t (FEDADAM)(FEDADAM)(FEDADAM)
xt+1 =xt +η mt√vt+τ
good choices (Zaheer et al., 2018), we emphasize that better results may be obtainable by tuning
these parameters.
B.2 SCAFFOLD
As discussed in Section 5, we compare all ﬁve optimizers above toSCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al.,
2019) on our various tasks. There are a few important notes about the validity of this comparison.
1. In cross-device settings, this is not a fair comparison. In particular, SCAFFOLD does not
work in settings where clients cannot maintain state across rounds, as may be the case for
federated learning systems on edge devices, such as cell phones.
2. SCAFFOLD has two variants described by Karimireddy et al. (2019). In Option I, the
control variate of a client is updated using a full gradient computation. This effectively
requires performing an extra pass over each client’s dataset, as compared to Algorithm 1. In
order to normalize the amount of client work, we instead use Option II, in which the clients’
control variates are updated using the difference between the server model and the client’s
learned model. This requires the same amount of client work as FEDAVG and Algorithm 2.
For practical reasons, we implement a version of SCAFFOLD mirroring Algorithm 4, in which we
performE epochs over the client’s dataset, and perform weighted averaging of client models. For
posterity, we give the full pseudo-code of the version of SCAFFOLD used in our experiments in
Algorithm 6. This is a simple adaptiation of Option II of the SCAFFOLD algorithm in (Karimireddy
et al., 2019) to the same setting as Algorithm 4. In particular, we letni denote the number of examples
in clienti’s local dataset.
In this algorithm,ci is the control variate of clienti, andc is the running average of these control
variates. In practice, we must initialize the control variatesci in some way when sampling a clienti
for the ﬁrst time. In our implementation, we setci =c the ﬁrst time we sample a clienti. This has
the advantage of exactly recovering FEDAVG when each client is sampled at most once. To initialize
c, we use the all zeros vector.
We compare this version of SCAFFOLD to FEDADAGRAD , FEDADAM, FEDYOGI, FEDAVGM,
and FEDAVG on our tasks, tuning the learning rates in the same way (using the same grids as in
Appendix D.2). In particular,ηl,η are tuned to obtain the best training performance over the last 100
communication rounds. We use the same federated hyperparameters for SCAFFOLD as discussed in
Section 4. Namely, we setE = 1, and sample 10 clients per round for all tasks except Stack Overﬂow
NWP, where we sample 50. The results are given in Figure 1 in Section 5.
23