Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Algorithm 6 SCAFFOLDSCAFFOLDSCAFFOLD, Option II - Batched data
Input:x0,c,ηl,η
fort = 0,··· ,T − 1 do
Sample a subsetS of clients
xt
i =xt
for each clienti∈S in parallel do
fore = 1,...,E do
forb∈B i do
gt
i =∇fi(xt
i;b)
xt
i =xt
i−ηl(gt
i−ci +c)
c+
i =ci−c + (E|Bi|ηl)−1(xt
i−xi)
∆xi =xt
i−xt, ∆ci =c+
i −ci
ci =c+
i
n = ∑
i∈Sni, ∆x = ∑
i∈S
ni
n ∆xi, ∆c = ∑
i∈S
ni
n ∆ci
xt+1 =xt +η∆x, c =c +|S|
N ∆c
B.3 L OOKAHEAD , A DAALTER, AND CLIENT ADAPTIVITY
The LOOKAHEAD optimizer (Zhang et al., 2019b) is primarily designed for non-FL settings. LOOKA -
HEAD uses a generic optimizer in the inner loop and updates its parameters using a “outer” learning
rate. Thus, unlike FEDOPT, LOOKAHEAD uses a single generic optimizer and is thus conceptually dif-
ferent. In fact, LOOKAHEAD can be seen as a special case ofFEDOPT in non-FL settings which uses a
generic optimizer CLIENT OPT as a client optimizer, and SGD as the server optimizer. While there are
multiple ways LOOKAHEAD could be generalized to a federated setting, one straightforward version
would simply use an adaptive method as the CLIENT OPT. On the other hand, ADAALTER (Xie et al.,
2019) is designed speciﬁcally for distributed settings. InADAALTER, clients use a local optimizer
similar to ADAGRAD (McMahan & Streeter, 2010a; Duchi et al., 2011) to perform multiple epochs
of training on their local datasets. Both LOOKAHEAD and ADAALTER use client adaptivity, which is
fundamentally different from the adaptive server optimizers proposed in Algorithm 2.
To illustrate the differences, consider the client-to-server communication inADAALTER. This requires
communicating both the model weights and the client accumulators (used to perform the adaptive
optimization, analogous tovt in Algorithm 2). In the case of ADAALTER, the client accumulator is
the same size as the model’s trainable weights. Thus, the client-to-server communication doubles for
this method, relative to FEDAVG. In ADAALTER, the server averages the client accumulators and
broadcasts the average to the next set of clients, who use this to initialize their adaptive optimizers.
This means that the server-to-client communication also doubles relative to FEDAVG. The same
would occur for any adaptive client optimizer in the distributed version of LOOKAHEAD described
above. For similar reasons, we see that client adaptive methods also increase the amount of memory
needed on the client (as they must store the current accumulator). By contrast, our adaptive server
methods (Algorithm 2) do not require extra communication or client memory relative to FEDAVG.
Thus, we see that server-side adaptive optimization beneﬁts from lower per-round communication
and client memory requirements, which are of paramount importance for FL applications (Bonawitz
et al., 2019).
C D ATASET & M ODELS
Here we provide detailed description of the datasets and models used in the paper. We use federated
versions of vision datasets EMNIST (Cohen et al., 2017), CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009),
and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), and language modeling datasets Shakespeare (McMa-
han et al., 2017) and StackOverﬂow (Authors, 2019). Statistics for the training datasets can be found
in Table 2. We give descriptions of the datasets, models, and tasks below. Statistics on the number of
clients and examples in both the training and test splits of the datasets are given in Table 2.
24