Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
adaptivity by using adaptive optimizers as client or server optimizers. Building upon this, we develop
novel adaptive optimization techniques for FL by using per-coordinate methods as server optimizers.
By focusing on adaptive server optimization, we enable use of adaptive learning rates without increase
in client storage or communication costs, and ensure compatibility with cross-device FL.
Main contributions In light of the above, we highlight the main contributions of the paper.
• We study a general framework for federated optimization using server and client optimizers. This
framework generalizes many existing federated optimization methods, including FEDAVG.
• We use this framework to design novel, cross-device compatible, adaptive federated optimization
methods, and provide convergence analysis in general nonconvex settings. To the best of our
knowledge, these are the ﬁrst methods for FL usingadaptive server optimization. We show an
important interplay between the number of local steps and the heterogeneity among clients.
• We introduce comprehensive and reproducible empirical benchmarks for comparing federated
optimization methods. These benchmarks consist of seven diverse and representative FL tasks
involving both image and text data, with varying amounts of heterogeneity and numbers of clients.
• We demonstrate strong empirical performance of our adaptive optimizers throughout, improving
upon commonly used baselines. Our results show that our methods can be easier to tune, and
highlight their utility in cross-device settings.
Related work FEDAVG was ﬁrst introduced by McMahan et al. (2017), who showed it can dramati-
cally reduce communication costs. Many variants have since been proposed to tackle issues such as
convergence and client drift. Examples include adding a regularization term in the client objectives
towards the broadcast model (Li et al., 2018), and server momentum (Hsu et al., 2019). When clients
are homogeneous, FEDAVG reduces to local SGD (Zinkevich et al., 2010), which has been analyzed
by many works (Stich, 2019; Yu et al., 2019; Wang & Joshi, 2018; Stich & Karimireddy, 2019; Basu
et al., 2019). In order to analyze FEDAVG in heterogeneous settings, many works derive convergence
rates depending on the amount of heterogeneity (Li et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Khaled et al., 2019;
Li et al., 2019b). Typically, the convergence rate ofFEDAVG gets worse with client heterogeneity.
By using control variates to reduce client drift, the SCAFFOLD method (Karimireddy et al., 2019)
achieves convergence rates that are independent of the amount of heterogeneity. While effective in
cross-silo FL, the method is incompatible with cross-device FL as it requires clients to maintain state
across rounds. For more detailed comparisons, we defer to Kairouz et al. (2019).
Adaptive methods have been the subject of signiﬁcant theoretical and empirical study, in both
convex (McMahan & Streeter, 2010b; Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma & Ba, 2015) and non-convex
settings (Li & Orabona, 2018; Ward et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019). Reddi et al. (2019); Zaheer et al.
(2018) study convergence failures of ADAM in certain non-convex settings, and develop an adaptive
optimizer, YOGI, designed to improve convergence. While most work on adaptive methods focuses
on non-FL settings, Xie et al. (2019) propose ADAALTER, a method for FL using adaptive client
optimization. Conceptually, our approach is also related to the LOOKAHEAD optimizer (Zhang et al.,
2019b), which was designed for non-FL settings. Similar to ADAALTER, an adaptive FL variant of
LOOKAHEAD entails adaptive client optimization (see Appendix B.3 for more details). We note that
both ADAALTER and LOOKAHEAD are, in fact, special cases of our framework (see Algorithm 1)
and the primary novelty of our work comes in focusing on adaptive server optimization. This allows
us to avoid aggregating optimizer states across clients, making our methods require at most half as
much communication and client memory usage per round (see Appendix B.3 for details).
Notation Fora,b∈ Rd, we let√a,a 2 anda/b denote the element-wise square root, square, and
division of the vectors. Forθi∈ Rd, we use bothθi,j and [θi]j to denote itsjth coordinate.
2 F EDERATED LEARNING AND FEDAVG
In federated learning, we solve an optimization problem of the form:
min
x∈Rd
f(x) = 1
m
m∑
i=1
Fi(x), (1)
whereFi(x) = Ez∼Di[fi(x,z )], is the loss function of the ith client,z∈Z , andDi is the data
distribution for the ith client. Fori̸= j,Di andDj may be very different. The functions Fi (and
2