Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Remark 1. The server learning rateη = 1 typically used in FEDAVG does not necessarily minimize
the upper bound in Theorems 1 & 2. The effect ofσg, a measure of client heterogeneity, on convergence
can be reduced by choosing sufﬁcientlyηl and a reasonably largeη (e.g. see Corollary 1). Thus, the
effect of client heterogeneity can be reduced by carefully choosing client and server learning rates,
but not removed entirely. Our empirical analysis (eg. Figure 1) supports this conclusion.
Discussion. We brieﬂy discuss our theoretical analysis and its implications in the FL setting. The
convergence rates for FEDADAGRAD and FEDADAM are similar, so our discussion applies to all the
adaptive federated optimization algorithms (including FEDYOGI) proposed in the paper.
(i) Comparison of convergence rates. WhenT is sufﬁciently large compared toK, O(1/
√
mKT )
is the dominant term in Corollary 1 & 2. Thus, we effectively obtain a convergence rate of
O(1/
√
mKT ), which matches the best known rate for the general non-convex setting of our interest
(e.g. see (Karimireddy et al., 2019)). We also note that in thei.i.d setting considered in (Wang
& Joshi, 2018), which corresponds toσg = 0, we match their convergence rates. Similar to the
centralized setting, it is possible to obtain convergence rates with better dependence on constants
for federated adaptive methods, compared to FEDAVG, by incorporating non-uniform bounds on
gradients across coordinates (Zaheer et al., 2018).
(ii) Learning rates & their decay. The client learning rate of 1/
√
T in our analysis requires knowl-
edge of the number of roundsT a priori; however, it is easy to generalize our analysis to the case
whereηl is decayed at a rate of 1/
√
t. Observe that one must decay ηl, not the server learning
rateη, to obtain convergence. This is because the client drift introduced by the local updates
does not vanish as T →∞ whenηl is constant. As we show in Appendix E.6, learning rate
decay can improve empirical performance. Also, note the inverse relationship betweenηl andη
in Corollary 1 & 2, which we observe in our empirical analysis (see Appendix E.4).
(iii) Communication efﬁciency & local steps. The total communication cost of the algorithms
depends on the number of communication roundsT . From Corollary 1 & 2, it is clear that a larger
K leads to fewer rounds of communication as long asK =O(Tσ 2
l/σ2
g). Thus, the number of
local iterations can be large when either the ratioσ2
l/σ2
g orT is large. In thei.i.d setting where
σg = 0, unsurprisingly,K can be very large.
(iv) Client heterogeneity. While careful selection of client and server learning rates can reduce
the effect of client heterogeneity (see Remark 1), it does not completely remove it. In highly
heterogeneous settings, it may be necessary to use mechanisms such as control variates (Karim-
ireddy et al., 2019). However, our empirical analysis suggest that for moderate, naturally arising
heterogeneity, adaptive optimizers are quite effective, especially in cross-device settings (see
Figure 1). Furthermore, our algorithms can be directly combined with such mechanisms.
As mentioned earlier, for the sake of simplicity, our analysis assumes full-participation (S = [m]).
Our analysis can be directly generalized to limited participation at the cost of an additional variance
term in our rates that depends on|S|/m, the fraction of clients sampled (see Section A.2.1 for details).
4 E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION : DATASETS , TASKS , AND METHODS
We evaluate our algorithms on what we believe is the most extensive and representative suite of
federated datasets and modeling tasks to date. We wish to understand how server adaptivity can help
improve convergence, especially in cross-device settings. To accomplish this, we conduct simulations
on seven diverse and representative learning tasks across ﬁve datasets. Notably, three of the ﬁve have
a naturally-arising client partitioning, highly representative of real-world FL problems.
Datasets, models, and tasks We use ﬁve datasets: CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton,
2009), EMNIST (Cohen et al., 2017), Shakespeare (McMahan et al., 2017), and Stack Overﬂow (Au-
thors, 2019). The ﬁrst three are image datasets, the last two are text datasets. For CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100, we train ResNet-18 (replacing batch norm with group norm (Hsieh et al., 2019)). For
EMNIST, we train a CNN for character recognition (EMNIST CR) and a bottleneck autoencoder
(EMNIST AE). For Shakespeare, we train an RNN for next-character-prediction. For Stack Overﬂow,
we perform tag prediction using logistic regression on bag-of-words vectors (SO LR) and train an
RNN to do next-word-prediction (SO NWP). For full details of the datasets, see Appendix C.
6