10714
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) combines both prin-
ciples and employs the ﬁrst and second moments of
the gradients of each learned parameter and applies
them during the backward step. Adam has become
a dominant optimizer, that is applied across many
applications, and, in particular, it is the de-facto
standard in the ﬁeld of adversarial training. It is
known for improving convergence to work well
with the default values of its own hyperparameters.
Multiple methods have been suggested for select-
ing hyperparameters (Srinivas et al., 2009; Wang
et al., 2016; Bergstra et al., 2011; Feurer et al.,
2014). Hyperband (Li et al., 2017) performs hy-
perparameter search as an inﬁnite-armed bandit
problem utilizing a predeﬁned amount of resources,
while searching for the best conﬁguration of hyper-
parameters that maximizes the given success crite-
rion. It can provide an order-of-magnitude speedup
compared to Bayesian optimization (Bergstra et al.,
2011; Snoek et al., 2012; Hutter et al., 2011).
In our experiments, we employ multiple meth-
ods from natural language understanding and the
ﬁeld of image generation. The methods vary in
the type of supervision employed or the task being
solved: (i) BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) is a pre-
trained transformer-based (Vaswani et al., 2017)
language model, that applies ﬁne-tuning on vari-
ous language understanding tasks using supervi-
sion. (ii) RecoBERT (Malkiel et al., 2020a) is
a text-similarity model that ﬁne-tunes BERT on
a given catalog, by jointly optimizing a standard
masked language modeling, along with a unique
title-description model. (iii) pix2pix (Isola et al.,
2017) generates an image in domainB based on an
input image in domain A, after observing match-
ing pairs during training. (iv) CycleGAN (Zhu
et al., 2017) performs the same task, while training
in an unsupervised manner on unmatched images
from the two domains. (v) SRGAN (Ledig et al.,
2017a) generates high-resolution images from low-
resolution ones and is trained in a supervised way.
3 Motivation: Multi-loss Dynamics
To examine the challenges that arise when not scal-
ing the losses correctly, we consider a simple re-
gression problem that involves the L1 or the L2
loss. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁt two coefﬁcients to learn
the polynomial f (x) = ax +bx2. To this end,
we randomly sample batches of x ∈ R from a
normal distribution, and train a network to min-
imize the loss, i.e, the network performs a dot
Figure 1: Learning the coefﬁcients of f (x) = ax +
bx2, minimizing L1, L2, or L1 where the gradients are
scaled with the magnitudes of the L2 gradients (training
step vs. loss).
product between (x,x 2) and the vector of parame-
tersW∈ R2, and the objective compares between
(x,x 2)W andf (x): for L1|(x,x 2)W−f (x)| and
for L2∥(x,x 2)W−f (x)∥2
2.
We track and analyze the loss and its gradients
on the two parameters. We run three Adam ex-
periments with the values a = 1.52, b =−0.29
(picked at random, results are very similar for other
values). Each time we train the model with a differ-
ent objective: L1, L2, and L1 where the gradients
are scaled with the magnitudes of the L2 gradients.
The latter utilizes the L1 loss and scales the gra-
dient magnitudes of the coefﬁcients to match the
magnitudes created by the L2 loss, i.e. we apply
(∂L1
∂W1
, ∂L1
∂W2
) := ( ∂L1
∂W1
, ∂L1
∂W2
)
∥(∂L2
∂W1
,∂L2
∂W2
)∥2
∥(∂L1
∂W1
,∂L1
∂W2
)∥2
during
the backward propagation step.
As shown in Fig. 1 (log scale), the L2 loss con-
verges to a lower loss than L1, since the latter os-
cillates around 10−2. The underlying reason is that
the gradients’ magnitude of the two coefﬁcients
w.r.t. the L2 loss constantly decreases during train-
ing, while the gradients’ magnitude w.r.t. the L1
remains unchanged (see appendix for a plot). Let
t := (x,x 2)W−f (x), the gradient of|t| w.r.t.t
are ∂
∂t|t| = 1 ift > 0 and ∂
∂t|t| =−1 ift < 0.
In contrast, the L2 gradients decrease with model
improvements, since ∂
∂tt2 = 2t.
Fig. 1 also shows that when scaled by the L2 gra-
dient magnitude, the L1 training converges to the
optimal solution. We, therefore, observe that the
gradient magnitude of a loss that converges well,
can scale the gradients of a loss which converges to
a larger error. This observation implies that instead
of ﬁnding a training schedule for a new loss, we
can rely on an existing loss for scaling.
We further explore this in a scenario with mul-
tiple loss terms. It is often the case that new loss