10723
Figure 5: Training dynamics in a two neurons network,
learning the coefﬁcients of a polynomial of the form
f (x) = ax + bx2, minimizing L1, L2 or L1 where
the gradients are scaled with the magnitudes of the
L2 gradients. The plot presents the gradients’ magni-
tude of the two parameters w.r.t. the loss function (i.e.
∥( ∂L1
∂W1
, ∂L1
∂W2
)∥2 and∥( ∂L2
∂W1
, ∂L2
∂W2
)∥2 for the L1 and L2
experiments, respectively).
score on the validation set. In the maps dataset, a
value of 59.61 was selected.
Fig. 8 compares the convergence of three Cycle-
GAN models: unbalanced MTAdam, unbalanced
Adam, and balanced Adam. All models are ap-
plied on the horse2zebra dataset (Deng et al., 2009).
As can be seen, MTAdam exhibits a competitive
convergence to the Adam experiment applied with
balanced weighting, which is much better than the
performance of Adam on the unbalanced weights.
Fig. 9 presents a few representative samples from
the CycleGAN(Zhu et al., 2017) experiments, em-
ployed to transfer horse images to zebras. As can
be seen, the unbalanced Adam training completely
fails to generate zebras images and collapses to
the identity mapping. This can be attributed to the
domination of cyclic loss in the unbalanced settings,
which dictates the convergence, leaveing the other
loss terms ineffective. On the other hand, the un-
balanced MTAdam model was able to successfully
generate zebra images, in a quality that is simi-
lar or better to the balanced adam model (which
uses the prescribed weights). In particular, in the
ﬁrst row, we can see that CycleGAN-Unbalanced-
MTAdam was able to outperform the CycleGAN-
Balanced-Adam experiment, as the latter fails to
generate a zebra image for this particular sample,
while MTAdam was able to generate a fairly good
quality image.
Fig. 10 depicts a few samples from the same
models described above, this time employed to
generate horse images from zebra images. As can
be seen, the unbalanced Adam fails again to gener-
ate horse images, collapses to the identity mapping,
and this time also introduces visual artifacts in a
few images (see the green artifact in the bottom
row). In addition, MTAdam yields images of the
same quality as the balanced Adam experiment.
Fig. 11 presents visual results for the SRGAN
(Ledig et al., 2017a) experiments. The images were
taken from Set14 (Zeyde et al., 2010). All models
were trained to generate high-resolution images
from low-resolution images, with a factor of 4x
upscaling. As can be seen, the SRGAN model that
employs unbalanced weights and Adam optimizer
yields images with visual artifacts, and low ﬁdelity.
This can be attributed to the domination of the
GAN and perceptual loss terms over the pixel-wise
term. In contrast, the SRGAN model that employs
our MTAdam optimizer with unbalanced weights
yields images of the same quality as the SRGAN
that utilizes the prescribed weights (Ledig et al.,
2017a) and Adam.