10717
Suboptimal weighting Optimal
SGD-Momentum RMSProp Adam MTAdam Adam
85.4±1.2 87.2±1.0 88.8±0.8 97.9±0.1 98.3±0.1
Table 1: Mean accuracy± SD on MNIST (100 runs).
time complexity also depends on the number of
loss termsO(Iθ ). The dependence on the number
of layersL in Alg. 1 can be absorbed inθ.
5 Experiments
We compare the results of MTAdam with ﬁve base-
lines: (1-3) Adam, RMSProp, and SGD with mo-
mentum, applied with suboptimal weightings. (4)
Hyperband (Li et al., 2017) applied to perform a
hyperparameter search for the weighting parame-
ters (lambdas). (5) Adam optimizer applied with
the prescribed weighting.
We note that baseline (4) beneﬁts from running
training multiple times and that baseline (5) em-
ploys the weights proposed for each method after a
development process that is likely to have included
a hyper-parameter search, in which multiple runs
were evaluated by the developers of each method.
For each optimization method, we employ the de-
fault parameters in pytorch. For all Adam and
MTAdam experiments,β1 = 0.9 andβ2 = 0.999.
For MTAdamβ3 = 0.9.
5.1 MNIST classiﬁcation
In order to turn MNIST into a suboptimal combina-
tion of multiple terms experiment, we compute the
loss for each of the digits separately, creating ten
losses, each weighted by a random weight from a
uniform distribution between 1 and 1000. The test
set is unweighted, which causes classes associated
with lower weights to suffer from underﬁtting.
The ofﬁcial of the PyTorch MNIST example is
used: two convolutional layers, followed by two
fully connected layers. The experiment is repeated
100 times, and for the sake of saving computations,
hyperband is not tested. The results in Tab. 1, show
a clear advantage for MTAdam over the other sub-
optimal alternatives.
5.2 BERT Experiments
To demonstrate the effectiveness of MTAdam to
recover from non-optimal weighting when applied
to Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), we ﬁne-
tune BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) with a sub-optimal
combination of terms. BERT is commonly ap-
plied with AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017),
which employs an L2 regularization on the net-
work weights. Thus, the BERT objective can be
formulated as a dual-loss objective consisting of a
standard classiﬁcation loss and an L2 regulariza-
tion:LBERT = λ1Lbce +λ2Lreg, whereLbce is
the binary cross-entropy loss and Lreg is the L2
regularization loss. The approximately optimalλ1
andλ2 weights proposed by BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019) are 1 and 0.01, respectively.
In our experiments, we ﬁne-tune BERT with
MTAdam, minimizing the above objective, where
the regularization is applied with equal weighting,
settingλ2 = 1. We compare MTAdam with Adam
applying the same dual-term objective and with the
AdamW. Note that AdamW applies the L2 regu-
larization directly on the model weights, i.e., the
L2 gradients are not combined with the ﬁrst and
second moments of the main loss.
Performance is evaluated on the MRPC (Dolan
and Brockett, 2005), RTE (Bentivogli et al., 2009),
and STS-B (Cer et al., 2017), and reported over
ﬁve experiments for each variant. The results in
Tab. 2, shows that MTAdam is the only method to
overcome the equal weights, achieving the results
obtained by Adam and AdamW on the prescribed
weights. The runtime of MTAdam applied on the
BERT architecture is comparable to the Adam and
AdamW alternatives, with up to 20% additional
compute time (measured on a single v100 GPU).
5.3 RecoBERT Experiments
We next apply MTAdam based training to Re-
coBERT (Malkiel et al., 2020a,b), which is a
recent state-of-the-art text-based item similarity
model. In the RecoBERT settings, a catalog of
textual items is given, where each item is com-
posed of a title-description pair. Item titles are
sentences and descriptions are paragraphs. The Re-
coBERT model is a BERT-based network trained
with self-supervision to jointly optimize a standard
masked language model (MLM) and a unique title-
description model (TDM). During training, title-
description pairs are tokenized and masked (similar
to BERT), and then propagated through the model.
The optimization goal is to reconstruct the masked
words, and predict whether a given pair of title and
description corresponds to the same item or not.
The RecoBERT objective can be expressed as:
LRecoBERT =LMLM +λLTDM (1)