10715
(a) (b)
Figure 2: We train a superresolution image mapping technique using two out of three loss terms: MSE, GAN, and
perceptual loss. (a) the GAN loss is well-balanced and we obtain effective training when combining it with the
MSE loss (blue curve). However, the weight of the perceptual loss was naively set to 1, which is two orders of
magnitude larger than the optimal value for combining it with the MSE loss. This leads to poor SSIM (Wang et al.,
2004) scores (black curve). However, when scaling the perceptual loss gradients by the magnitude of the gradients
of the GAN loss, the perceptual loss supports the MSE loss (red curve). (b) same, where the roles of the perceptual
loss and the GAN loss are reversed. Similar FID (Heusel et al., 2017) graphs can be found in the appendix.
terms are added during training. However, one
would like to avoid tuning each one separately. As
a computationally efﬁcient sample, we consider
supervised image superresolution using two out of
the three loss terms of Ledig et al. (2017b): MSE,
a GAN which veriﬁes that the result is in the target
domain, and a perceptual loss. We consider the
case in which either the GAN loss or the percep-
tual loss are weighted equally, in comparison to
the MSE (a weight that is larger by two orders of
magnitude than the optimal) and observe, in Fig. 2
that this leads to suboptimal results. However, us-
ing the gradient magnitude of a balanced term ﬁxes
this and allows the method to train well. Thus, this
motivating experiment demonstrates that we can
balance a loss term by using the gradient magni-
tude of another term. Experiments with the three
terms together are shown in Sec. 5.
4 Method
The Adam algorithm optimized one stochastic ob-
jective function ft(θ) over the set of parameters
θ, wheret is an index of the current mini-batch of
samples. In contrast, MTAdam optimizes a set of
such termsf 1
t (θ),...,f I
t (θ). While Adam’s task is
to minimize the expected valueEt[ft(θ)] w.r.t. the
parametersθ, MTAdam minimizes a weighted av-
erage of theI terms. The weights of these mixtures
are all positive, but otherwise unknown. The guid-
ing principle for the determination of the weights
at each iteration t is that the moving average of
the magnitude of the gradient of each term is equal
across terms. This magnitude is evaluated and bal-
anced at every layer of the network.
In Adam, two moments are continuously up-
dated, using a moving average scheme:mt is the
ﬁrst moment of the gradient∇θft andvt is the sec-
ond moment. Both are vectors of the same size of
θ. The moving averages are computed using the
mixing coefﬁcientsβ1 andβ2 for the two moments.
MTAdam records such moments for each term
i = 1...I separately. In addition, it uses a mixing
coefﬁcientβ3 in order to maintain the moving av-
erage of the gradient magnitude per each layer ℓ,
which is denoted byni
l,t.
Adam borrows from the SGD with momentum
method (Nesterov) and updates the vector of pa-
rameters based on the weighted ﬁrst moment of the
gradient. In MTAdam, the ﬁrst moment is com-
puted based on a weighted gradient, in which the
parameters of each layer ℓ for every term i are
weighted such that their magnitude is normalized
by the factorni
ℓ,t. This way, across all layers, and
at every time point, theI terms contribute equally
to the gradient step.
The Adam algorithm is depicted in the left side
of Alg. 1 and MTAdam on the right. In line 1,
MTAdam initializesI pairs of ﬁrst and second mo-
ment vectors. This is similar to Adam, except for
initializing a pair of moments for each loss term.
In line 2, and different from Adam, MTAdam ini-
tializesI ﬁrst moments for the magnitude of the
gradients, per layer. In line 3, both MTAdam and
Adam iterate over the stochastic mini-batches, per-
formingT training steps.
In line 4, MTAdam iterates over the loss terms.