Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10713–10729
November 7–11, 2021. c⃝2021 Association for Computational Linguistics
10713
MTAdam: Automatic Balancing of Multiple Training Loss Terms
Itzik Malkiel
Tel Aviv University
itzik.malkiel@gmail.com
Lior Wolf
Tel Aviv University
wolf@cs.tau.ac.il
Abstract
When training neural models, it is common to
combine multiple loss terms. The balancing of
these terms requires considerable human effort
and is computationally demanding. Moreover,
the optimal trade-off between the loss terms
can change as training progresses, e.g., for ad-
versarial terms. In this work, we generalize the
Adam optimization algorithm to handle multi-
ple loss terms. The guiding principle is that
for every layer, the gradient magnitude of the
terms should be balanced. To this end, the
Multi-Term Adam (MTAdam) computes the
derivative of each loss term separately, infers
the ﬁrst and second moments per parameter
and loss term, and calculates a ﬁrst moment for
the magnitude per layer of the gradients aris-
ing from each loss. This magnitude is used to
continuously balance the gradients across all
layers, in a manner that both varies from one
layer to the next and dynamically changes over
time. Our results show that training with the
new method leads to fast recovery from sub-
optimal initial loss weighting and to training
outcomes that match or improve conventional
training with the prescribed hyperparameters
of each method.
1 Introduction
In both supervised and unsupervised learning,
adding loss terms often leads to improved perfor-
mance. However, as more loss terms are added, the
space of possible balancing weights increases expo-
nentially, and more resources need to be allocated
to identify good conﬁgurations that would justify
the added terms. Another common challenge is that
at different stages of the training process, the opti-
mal balance may change (Mescheder et al., 2017).
It is, therefore, necessary to have the balancing
terms update dynamically during training, which
further increases the hyperparameter space.
In this work, we introduce Multi-Term
Adam (MTAdam), an optimization algorithm for
multi-term loss functions. MTAdam extends
Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) and allows an ef-
fective training of an unweighted multi-term loss
objective. Thus, MTAdam can streamline the com-
putationally demanding task of hyperparameter
search, which is required for effectively weight-
ing multi-term loss objectives.
At every training iteration, a dynamic weight is
assigned to each of the loss terms, based on the
magnitude of the gradient that each term entails.
The weights are assigned in a way that balances be-
tween these gradients and equates their magnitude.
This, however, would be an ineffective balancing
method, without two crucial components: (i) the
balancing needs to occur independently for each
layer of the neural network and separately over
the losses, since the relative contributions of the
losses vary, depending on the layer, and (ii) the
update step needs to take into account the maxi-
mal variance among all losses, to support sufﬁcient
explorations in places of the parameter space, in
which one of the losses becomes more sensitive.
The main focus of our experiments is in the do-
mains of natural language understanding and con-
ditional adversarial image generation, in which
the leading methods often utilize multiple loss
terms. Our results show that MTAdam is able to re-
cover from suboptimal starting points, in which the
weight parameters are set inappropriately, while
Adam and other baseline methods cannot.
2 Related Work
SGD with momentum (Nesterov) (Rumelhart et al.,
1986) is an optimization algorithm that extends
SGD, suggesting to update the network’s parame-
ters by a moving average of the gradients, rather
than the gradients at each step. Root Mean Square
Propagation (RMSProp) (Tieleman and Hinton,
2012) extends SGD, dividing the learning rate dur-
ing the backward step, by the moving average of the
second moment of the gradients of each parameter.