Graph WaveNet for Deep Spatial-Temporal Graph Modeling
Zonghan Wu1 , Shirui Pan2 , Guodong Long1 , Jing Jiang1 and Chengqi Zhang1
1Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
2Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia
zonghan.wu-3@student.uts.edu.au, shirui.pan@monash.edu,
fguodong.long, jing.jiang, chengqi.zhangg@uts.edu.au
Abstract
Spatial-temporal graph modeling is an important
task to analyze the spatial relations and temporal
trends of components in a system. Existing ap-
proaches mostly capture the spatial dependency on
a ﬁxed graph structure, assuming that the under-
lying relation between entities is pre-determined.
However, the explicit graph structure (relation)
does not necessarily reﬂect the true dependency and
genuine relation may be missing due to the incom-
plete connections in the data. Furthermore, ex-
isting methods are ineffective to capture the tem-
poral trends as the RNNs or CNNs employed in
these methods cannot capture long-range tempo-
ral sequences. To overcome these limitations, we
propose in this paper a novel graph neural network
architecture, Graph WaveNet, for spatial-temporal
graph modeling. By developing a novel adaptive
dependency matrix and learn it through node em-
bedding, our model can precisely capture the hid-
den spatial dependency in the data. With a stacked
dilated 1D convolution component whose recep-
tive ﬁeld grows exponentially as the number of
layers increases, Graph WaveNet is able to handle
very long sequences. These two components are
integrated seamlessly in a uniﬁed framework and
the whole framework is learned in an end-to-end
manner. Experimental results on two public traf-
ﬁc network datasets, METR-LA and PEMS-BAY ,
demonstrate the superior performance of our algo-
rithm.
1 Introduction
Spatial-temporal graph modeling has received increasing at-
tention with the advance of graph neural networks. It aims
to model the dynamic node-level inputs by assuming inter-
dependency between connected nodes, as demonstrated by
Figure 1. Spatial-temporal graph modeling has wide appli-
cations in solving complex system problems such as traf-
ﬁc speed forecasting [Li et al., 2018b ], taxi demand pre-
diction [Yao et al., 2018 ], human action recognition [Yan
Corresponding Author.
Figure 1: Spatial-temporal graph modeling. In a spatial-temporal
graph, each node has dynamic input features. The aim is to model
each node’s dynamic features given the graph structure.
et al., 2018 ], and driver maneuver anticipation [Jain et al.,
2016]. For a concrete example, in trafﬁc speed forecasting,
speed sensors on roads of a city form a graph where the edge
weights are judged by two nodes’ Euclidean distance. As the
trafﬁc congestion on one road could cause lower trafﬁc speed
on its incoming roads, it is natural to consider the underlying
graph structure of the trafﬁc system as the prior knowledge of
inter-dependency relationships among nodes when modeling
time series data of the trafﬁc speed on each road.
A basic assumption behind spatial-temporal graph model-
ing is that a node’s future information is conditioned on its
historical information as well as its neighbors’ historical in-
formation. Therefore how to capture spatial and temporal de-
pendencies simultaneously becomes a primary challenge. Re-
cent studies on spatial-temporal graph modeling mainly fol-
low two directions. They either integrate graph convolution
networks (GCN) into recurrent neural networks (RNN) [Seo
et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018b ] or into convolution neural net-
works (CNN) [Yu et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2018]. While hav-
ing shown the effectiveness of introducing the graph structure
of data into a model, these approaches face two major short-
comings.
First, these studies assume the graph structure of data re-
ﬂects the genuine dependency relationships among nodes.
However, there are circumstances when a connection does not
entail the inter-dependency relationship between two nodes
and when the inter-dependency relationship between two
nodes exists but a connection is missing. To give each circum-
stance an example, let us consider a recommendation system.
In the ﬁrst case, two users are connected, but they may have
distinct preferences over products. In the second case, two
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
1907