users may share a similar preference, but they are not linked
together. Zhang et al. [2018] used attention mechanisms to
address the ﬁrst circumstance by adjusting the dependency
weight between two connected nodes, but they failed to con-
sider the second circumstance.
Second, current studies for spatial-temporal graph mod-
eling are ineffective to learn temporal dependencies. RNN-
based approaches suffer from time-consuming iterative prop-
agation and gradient explosion/vanishing for capturing long-
range sequences [Seo et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018b; Zhang
et al., 2018 ]. On the contrary, CNN-based approaches en-
joy the advantages of parallel computing, stable gradients and
low memory requirement [Yu et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2018 ].
However, these works need to use many layers in order to
capture very long sequences because they adopt standard 1D
convolution whose receptive ﬁeld size grows linearly with an
increase in the number of hidden layers.
In this work, we present a CNN-based method named
Graph WaveNet, which addresses the two shortcomings we
have aforementioned. We propose a graph convolution layer
in which a self-adaptive adjacency matrix can be learned from
the data through an end-to-end supervised training. In this
way, the self-adaptive adjacency matrix preserves hidden spa-
tial dependencies. Motivated by WaveNet[Oord et al., 2016],
we adopt stacked dilated casual convolutions to capture tem-
poral dependencies. The receptive ﬁeld size of stacked di-
lated casual convolution networks grows exponentially with
an increase in the number of hidden layers. With the sup-
port of stacked dilated casual convolutions, Graph WaveNet
is able to handle spatial-temporal graph data with long-range
temporal sequences efﬁciently and effectively. The main con-
tributions of this work are as follows:
 We construct a self-adaptive adjacency matrix which
preserves hidden spatial dependencies. Our proposed
self-adaptive adjacency matrix is able to uncover unseen
graph structures automatically from the data without any
guidance of prior knowledge. Experiments validate that
our method improves the results when spatial dependen-
cies are known to exist but are not provided.
 We present an effective and efﬁcient framework to cap-
ture spatial-temporal dependencies simultaneously. The
core idea is to assemble our proposed graph convolution
with dilated casual convolution in a way that each graph
convolution layer tackles spatial dependencies of nodes’
information extracted by dilated casual convolution lay-
ers at different granular levels.
 We evaluate our proposed model on trafﬁc datasets
and achieve state-of-the-art results with low compu-
tation costs. The source codes of Graph WaveNet
are publicly available from https://github.com/
nnzhan/Graph-WaveNet.
2 Related Works
2.1 Graph Convolution Networks
Graph convolution networks are building blocks for learning
graph-structured data [Wu et al., 2019]. They are widely ap-
plied in domains such as node embedding [Pan et al., 2018],
node classiﬁcation [Kipf and Welling, 2017 ], graph classiﬁ-
cation [Ying et al., 2018 ], link prediction [Zhang and Chen,
2018] and node clustering [Wang et al., 2017 ]. There are
two mainstreams of graph convolution networks, the spectral-
based approaches and the spatial-based approaches. Spectral-
based approaches smooth a node’s input signals using graph
spectral ﬁlters [Bruna et al., 2014; Defferrard et al., 2016;
Kipf and Welling, 2017 ]. Spatial-based approaches extract
a node’s high-level representation by aggregating feature in-
formation from neighborhoods [Atwood and Towsley, 2016;
Gilmer et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017 ]. In these ap-
proaches, the adjacency matrix is considered as prior knowl-
edge and is ﬁxed throughout training. Monti et al. [2017]
learned the weight of a node’s neighbor through Gaussian
kernels. Velickovic et al. [2017] updated the weight of a
node’s neighbor via attention mechanisms. Liu et al. [2019]
proposed an adaptive path layer to explore the breadth and
depth of a node’s neighborhood. Although these methods as-
sume the contribution of each neighbor to the central node
is different and need to be learned, they still rely on a pre-
deﬁned graph structure. Li et al. [2018a] adopted distance
metrics to adaptively learn a graph’s adjacency matrix for
graph classiﬁcation problems. This generated adjacency ma-
trix is conditioned on nodes’ inputs. As inputs of a spatial-
temporal graph are dynamic, their method is unstable for
spatial-temporal graph modeling.
2.2 Spatial-temporal Graph Networks
The majority of Spatial-temporal Graph Networks follows
two directions, namely, RNN-based and CNN-based ap-
proaches. One of the early RNN-based methods captured
spatial-temporal dependencies by ﬁltering inputs and hid-
den states passed to a recurrent unit using graph convo-
lution [Seo et al., 2018 ]. Later works adopted different
strategies such as diffusion convolution [Li et al., 2018b ]
and attention mechanisms [Zhang et al., 2018 ] to improve
model performance. Another parallel work used node-level
RNNs and edge-level RNNs to handle different aspects of
temporal information [Jain et al., 2016 ]. The main draw-
backs of RNN-based approaches are that it becomes inef-
ﬁcient for long sequences and its gradients are more likely
to explode when they are combined with graph convolution
networks. CNN-based approaches combine a graph con-
volution with a standard 1D convolution [Yu et al., 2018;
Yan et al., 2018 ]. While being computationally efﬁcient,
these two approaches have to stack many layers or use global
pooling to expand the receptive ﬁeld of a neural network
model.
3 Methodology
In this section, we ﬁrst give the mathematical deﬁnition of the
problem we are addressing in this paper. Next, we describe
two building blocks of our framework, the graph convolution
layer (GCN) and the temporal convolution layer (TCN). They
work together to capture the spatial-temporal dependencies.
Finally, we outline the architecture of our framework.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19)
1908