KDD ’20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA Wei Jin, Yao Ma, Xiaorui Liu, Xianfeng Tang, Suhang Wang, and Jiliang Tang
properties of low rank and sparsity. As demonstrated in Figure1c,
the rank decreases much faster by removing adversarial edges than
by removing normal edges. This implies that the low rank and spar-
sity constraint can remove the adversarial edges instead of normal
edges. Given the adjacency matrix A of a poisoned graph, we can
formulate the above process as follows:
arg min
S∈S
L0 = ∥A − S∥2
F + R(S), s.t ., S = S⊤. (3)
Since adversarial attacks target on performing unnoticeable per-
turbations to graphs, the first term ∥A − S∥2
F ensures that the new
adjacency matrix S should be close to A. As we assume that the
graph are undirected, the new adjacency matrix should be sym-
metric, i.e., S = S⊤. R(S) denotes the constraints on S to enforce
the properties of low rank and sparsity. According to [ 7, 19, 26],
minimizing the ℓ1 norm and the nuclear norm of a matrix can force
the matrix to be sparse and low-rank, respectively. Hence, to ensure
a sparse and low-rank graph, we want to minimize theℓ1 norm and
the nuclear norm of S. Eq. (3) can be rewritten as:
arg min
S∈S
L0 = ∥A − S∥2
F +α∥S∥1 +β∥S∥∗, s.t ., S = S⊤, (4)
whereαandβare predefined parameters that control the contri-
butions of the properties of sparsity and low rank, respectively.
One important benefit to minimize the nuclear norm ∥S∥∗ is that
we can reduce every singular value, thus alleviating the impact of
enlarging singular values from adversarial attacks.
4.2 Exploring Feature Smoothness
It is evident that connected nodes in a graph are likely to share
similar features. In fact, this observation has been made on graphs
from numerous domains. For example, two connected users in a
social graph are likely to share similar attributes [24], two linked
web pages in the webpage graph tend to have similar contents [28]
and two connected papers in the citation network usually have
similar topics [ 17]. Meanwhile, recently it is demonstrated that
adversarial attacks on graphs tend to connect nodes with distinct
features [31]. Thus, we aim to ensure the feature smoothness in
the learned graph. The feature smoothness can be captured by the
following term Ls :
Ls = 1
2
NÕ
i, j=1
Si j(xi − xj )2, (5)
where S is the new adjacency matrix,Si j indicates the connection of
vi andvj in the learned graph and (xi − xj )2 measures the feature
difference betweenvi andvj . Ls can be rewritten as:
Ls = X⊤LX, (6)
where L = D − S is the graph Laplacian matrix of S and D is the
diagonal matrix of S. In this work, we use normalized Laplacian
matrix ˆL = D−1/2LD−1/2 instead of L to make feature smoothness
independent on the degrees of the graph nodes [1], i.e.,
Ls = tr (XT ˆLX) = 1
2
dÕ
k =1
NÕ
i, j=1
Si j( xi√di
− xj
p
dj
)2, (7)
where di denotes the degree of vi in the learned graph. In the
learned graph, ifvi andvj are connected (i.e., Si j , 0), we expect
that the feature difference(xi −xj )2 should be small. In other words,
if the features between two connected node are quite different, Ls
would be very large. Therefore, the smaller Ls is, the smoother
features X are on the graphS. Thus, to fulfill the feature smoothness
in the learned graph, we should minimize Ls . Therefore, we can
add the feature smoothness term to the objective function of Eq. (4)
to penalize rapid changes in features between adjacent nodes as:
arg min
S∈S
L = L0 +λ· L s = L0 +λtr (XT ˆLX), s.t ., S = S⊤, (8)
whereλis a predefined parameter to control the contribution from
feature smoothness.
4.3 Objective Function of Pro-GNN
Intuitively, we can follow the preprocessing strategy [ 12, 31] to
defend against adversarial attacks – we first learn a graph from
the poisoned graph via Eq. (8) and then train a GNN model based
on the learned graph. However, with such a two-stage strategy,
the learned graph may be suboptimal for the GNN model on the
given task. Thus, we propose a better strategy to jointly learn the
graph structure and the GNN model for a specific downstream
task. We empirically show that jointly learning GNN model and
the adjacency matrix is better than two stage one in Sec 5.4.2. The
final objective function of Pro-GNN is given as
arg min
S∈S,θ
L = L0 +λLs +γLG N N (9)
= ∥A − S∥2
F +α∥S∥1 +β∥S∥∗ +γLG N N (θ, S, X, YL) +λtr (XT ˆLX)
s.t . S = S⊤,
where LG N N is a loss function for the GNN model that is controlled
by a predefined parameterγ. Another benefit of this formulation is
that the information from LG N N can also guide the graph learning
process to defend against adversarial attacks since the goal of graph
adversarial attacks is to maximize LG N N.
4.4 An Optimization Algorithm
Jointly optimizingθand S in Eq.(9) is challenging. The constraints
on S further exacerbate the difficulty. Thus, in this work, we use an
alternating optimization schema to iteratively updateθand S.
Update θ . To updateθ, we fixS and remove terms that are irrelevant
toθ, then the objective function in Eq.(9) reduces to:
min
θ
LG N N (θ, S, X, YL) =
Õ
u ∈VL
ℓ (fθ(X, S)u ,yu ) , (10)
which is a typical GNN optimization problem and we can learnθ
via stochastic gradient descent.
Update S. Similarly, to update S, we fixθand arrive at
min
S
L(S, A) +α∥S∥1 +β∥S∥∗ s.t ., S = S⊤, S ∈ S , (11)
where L(S, A) is defined as
L(S, A) = ∥A − S∥2
F + LG N N (θ, S, X, Y ) +λtr (XT ˆLX). (12)
Note that both ℓ1 norm and nuclear norm are non-differentiable.
For optimization problem with only one non-diffiential regularizer,