Graph Structure Learning for Robust Graph Neural Networks
Wei Jin
Michigan State University
jinwei2@msu.edu
Yao Ma
Michigan State University
mayao4@msu.edu
Xiaorui Liu
Michigan State University
xiaorui@msu.edu
Xianfeng Tang
Pennsylvania State University
tangxianfeng@outlook.com
Suhang Wang
Pennsylvania State University
szw494@psu.edu
Jiliang Tang
Michigan State University
tangjili@msu.edu
ABSTRACT
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are powerful tools in representa-
tion learning for graphs. However, recent studies show that GNNs
are vulnerable to carefully-crafted perturbations, called adversarial
attacks. Adversarial attacks can easily fool GNNs in making predic-
tions for downstream tasks. The vulnerability to adversarial attacks
has raised increasing concerns for applying GNNs in safety-critical
applications. Therefore, developing robust algorithms to defend
adversarial attacks is of great significance. A natural idea to defend
adversarial attacks is to clean the perturbed graph. It is evident
that real-world graphs share some intrinsic properties. For example,
many real-world graphs are low-rank and sparse, and the features of
two adjacent nodes tend to be similar. In fact, we find that adversar-
ial attacks are likely to violate these graph properties. Therefore, in
this paper, we explore these properties to defend adversarial attacks
on graphs. In particular, we propose a general framework Pro-GNN,
which can jointly learn a structural graph and a robust graph neural
network model from the perturbed graph guided by these proper-
ties. Extensive experiments on real-world graphs demonstrate that
the proposed framework achieves significantly better performance
compared with the state-of-the-art defense methods, even when
the graph is heavily perturbed. We release the implementation of
Pro-GNN to our DeepRobust repository for adversarial attacks and
defenses 1. The specific experimental settings to reproduce our re-
sults can be found in https://github.com/ChandlerBang/Pro-GNN.
ACM Reference Format:
Wei Jin, Yao Ma, Xiaorui Liu, Xianfeng Tang, Suhang Wang, and Jiliang
Tang. 2020. Graph Structure Learning for Robust Graph Neural Networks.
In 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD ’20), August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/XXXXXX.XXXXXX
1 INTRODUCTION
Graphs are ubiquitous data structures in numerous domains, such as
chemistry (molecules), finance (trading networks) and social media
1https://github.com/DSE-MSU/DeepRobust
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7998-4/20/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/XXXXXX.XXXXXX
(the Facebook friend network). With their prevalence, it is particu-
larly important to learn effective representations of graphs and then
apply them to solve downstream tasks. Recent years have witnessed
great success from Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [15, 17, 21, 29] in
representation learning of graphs. GNNs follow a message-passing
scheme [14], where the node embedding is obtained by aggregat-
ing and transforming the embeddings of its neighbors. Due to the
good performance, GNNs have been applied to various analytical
tasks including node classification [17], link prediction [18], and
recommender systems [34].
Although promising results have been achieved, recent stud-
ies have shown that GNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks
[10, 16, 31, 38, 39]. In other words, the performance of GNNs can
greatly degrade under an unnoticeable perturbation in graphs. The
lack of robustness of these models can lead to severe consequences
for critical applications pertaining to the safety and privacy. For
example, in credit card fraud detection, fraudsters can create several
transactions with only a few high-credit users to disguise them-
selves, thus escaping from the detection based on GNNs. Hence,
developing robust GNN models to resist adversarial attacks is of
significant importance. Modifying graph data can perturb either
node features or graph structures. However, given the complexity
of structural information, the majority of existing adversarial at-
tacks on graph data have focused on modifying graph structure
especially adding/deleting/rewiring edges [33]. Thus, in this work,
we aim to defend against the most common setting of adversarial
attacks on graph data, i.e., poisoning adversarial attacks on graph
structure. Under this setting, the graph structure has already been
perturbed by modifying edges before training GNNs while node
features are not changed.
One perspective to design an effective defense algorithm is to
clean the perturbed graph such as removing the adversarial edges
and restoring the deleted edges [27, 37]. The key challenge from this
perspective is what criteria we should follow to clean the perturbed
graph. It is well known that real-world graphs often share certain
properties. First, many real-world clean graphs are low-rank and
sparse [36]. For instance, in a social network, most individuals are
connected with only a small number of neighbors and there are
only a few factors influencing the connections among users [13, 36].
Second, connected nodes in a clean graph are likely to share similar
features or attributes (or feature smoothness) [24]. For example, in
a citation network, two connected publications often share similar
topics [17]. Figure 1 demonstrates these properties of clean and
poisoned graphs. Specifically, we apply the state-of-the-art graph
poisoning attack, metattack [39], to perturb the graph data and
visualize the graph properties before and after mettack. As shown
arXiv:2005.10203v1  [cs.LG]  20 May 2020