H Real Datasets: Details
Datasets In our experiments, we use the following real-world datasets with varying levels of
homophily ratios h. Some network statistics are given in Table 5.
• Texas, Wisconsin and Cornell are graphs representing links between web pages of the corre-
sponding universities, originally collected by the CMU WebKB project. We used the preprocessed
version in [26]. In these networks, nodes are web pages, which are classiﬁed into 5 categories:
course, faculty, student, project, staff.
• Squirrel and Chameleon are subgraphs of web pages in Wikipedia discussing the corresponding
topics, collected by [29]. For the classiﬁcation task, we utilize the class labels generated by [26],
where the nodes are categorized into 5 classes based on the amount of their average trafﬁc.
• Actor is a graph representing actor co-occurrence in Wikipedia pages, processed by [26] based on
the ﬁlm-director-actor-writer network in [35]. We also use the class labels generated by [26].
• Cora, Pubmed and Citeseerare citation graphs originally introduced in [30, 22], which are among
the most widely used benchmarks for semi-supervised node classiﬁcation [31, 13]. Each node is
assigned a class label based on the research ﬁeld. These datasets use a bag of words representation
as the feature vector for each node.
• Cora Full is an extended version of Cora, introduced in [4, 31], which contain more papers and
research ﬁelds than Cora. This dataset also uses a bag of words representation as the feature vector
for each node.
Data Limitations As discussed in [ 31, 13], Cora, Pubmed and Citeseer are widely adopted as
benchmarks for semi-supervised node classiﬁcation tasks; however, all these benchmark graphs
display strong homophily, with edge homophily ratio h≥ 0.7. As a result, the wide adaptation
of these benchmarks have masked the limitations of the homophily assumption in many existing
GNN models. Open Graph Benchmark is a recent effort of proposing more challenging, realistic
benchmarks with improved data quality comparing to the existing benchmarks [13]. However, with
respect to homophily, we found that the proposed OGB datasets display homophily h > 0.5.
In our synthetic experiments (§ G), we used ogbn-products from this effort to generate higher
quality synthetic benchmarks while varying the homophily ratioh. In our experiments on real datasets,
we go beyond the typically-used benchmarks (Cora, Pubmed, Citeseer) and consider benchmarks with
strong heterophily (Table 5). That said, these datasets also have limitations, including relatively small
sizes (e.g., WebKB benchmarks), artiﬁcial classes (e.g., Squirrel and Chameleon have class labels
based on ranking of page trafﬁc), or unusual network structure (e.g.,Squirrel and Chameleon are
dense, with many nodes sharing the same neighbors — cf. § 5.2). We hope that this paper will
encourage future work on more diverse datasets with different levels of homophily, and lead to higher
quality datasets for benchmarking GNN models in the heterophily settings.
30