the graph structure altogether, such as multilayer perceptrons or MLPs, can outperform a number of
existing GNNs. Motivated by this limitation, we make the following contributions:
• Current Limitations: We reveal the limitation of GNNs to learn over networks with heterophily,
which is ignored in the literature due to evaluation on few benchmarks with similar properties. § 3
• Key Designs for Heterophily & New Model:We identify a set of key designs that can boost learn-
ing from the graph structure in heterophily without trading off accuracy in homophily: (D1) ego-
and neighbor-embedding separation, (D2) higher-order neighborhoods, and (D3) combination of
intermediate representations. We justify the designs theoretically, and combine them into a model,
H2GCN , that effectively adapts to both heterophily and homophily. We compare it to prior GNN
models, and make our code and data available at https://github.com/GemsLab/H2GCN. § 3-4
• Extensive Empirical Evaluation: We empirically analyze our model and competitive existing
GNN models on both synthetic and real networks covering the full spectrum of low-to-high
homophily (besides the typically-used benchmarks with strong homophily only). In synthetic
networks, our detailed ablation study of H2GCN (which is free of confounding designs) shows
that the identiﬁed designs result in up to 40% performance gain in heterophily. In real networks,
we observe that GNN models utilizing even a subset of our identiﬁed designs outperform popular
models without them by up to 27% in heterophily, while being competitive in homophily. § 5
2 Notation and Preliminaries
Figure 1: Neighborhoods.
We summarize our notation in Table A.1 (App. A). LetG = (V,E) be
an undirected, unweighted graph with nodesetV and edgesetE. We
denote a general neighborhood centered around v as N(v) (G may
have self-loops), the corresponding neighborhood that does not include
the ego (node v) as ¯N(v), and the general neighbors of node v at
exactly i hops/steps away (minimum distance) as Ni(v). For example,
N1(v) ={u : (u, v)∈E} are the immediate neighbors of v. Other
examples are shown in Fig. 1. We represent the graph by its adjacency
matrix A∈{ 0, 1}n×n and its node feature matrix X∈ Rn×F , where
the vector xv corresponds to the ego-feature of node v, and{xu : u∈ ¯N(v)} to its neighbor-features.
We further assume a class label vector y, which for each node v contains a unique class label yv. The
goal of semi-supervised node classiﬁcation is to learn a mappingℓ :V→Y , whereY is the set of
labels, given a set of labeled nodesTV ={(v1, y1), (v2, y2), ...} as training data.
Graph neural networks From a probabilistic perspective, most GNN models assume the following
local Markov property on node features: for each node v∈V , there exists a neighborhood N(v) such
that yv only depends on the ego-feature xv and neighbor-features{xu : u∈ N(v)}. Most models
derive the class label yv via the following representation learning approach:
r(k)
v =f
(
r(k−1)
v , {r(k−1)
u :u ∈N(v)}
)
, r(0)
v = xv, andyv = arg max{softmax(r(K)
v )W}, (1)
where the embedding function f is applied repeatedly in K total rounds, node v’s representation
(or hidden state vector) at round k, r(k)
v , is learned from its ego- and neighbor-representations in
the previous round, and a softmax classiﬁer with learnable weight matrixW is applied to the ﬁnal
representation of v. Most existing models differ in their deﬁnitions of neighborhoods N(v) and
embedding function f. A typical deﬁnition of neighborhood is N1(v)—i.e., the 1-hop neighbors of v.
As for f, in graph convolutional networks (GCN) [17] each node repeatedly averages its own features
and those of its neighbors to update its own feature representation. Using an attention mechanism,
GAT [36] models the inﬂuence of different neighbors more precisely as a weighted average of the
ego- and neighbor-features. GraphSAGE [11] generalizes the aggregation beyond averaging, and
models the ego-features distinctly from the neighbor-features in its subsampled neighborhood.
Homophily and heterophily In this work, we focus on heterophily in class labels. We ﬁrst deﬁne
the edge homophily ratio h as a measure of the graph homophily level, and use it to deﬁne graphs
with strong homophily/heterophily:
Deﬁnition 1 The edge homophily ratio h = |{(u,v):(u,v)∈E∧yu=yv}|
|E| is the fraction of edges in a
graph which connect nodes that have the same class label (i.e., intra-class edges).
Deﬁnition 2 Graphs with strong homophily have high edge homophily ratio h→ 1, while graphs
with strong heterophily (i.e., low/weak homophily) have small edge homophily ratio h→ 0.
2