by a non-linear transformation. For heterophily, after aggregating the neighbors’ representations, the
deﬁnition ofCOMBINE (akin to ‘skip connection’ between layers) is critical: a simple way to combine
the ego- and the aggregated neighbor-embeddings without ‘mixing’ them is with concatenation as in
GraphSAGE [11]—rather than averaging all of them as in the GCN model by Kipf and Welling [17].
Intuition. In heterophily settings, by deﬁnition (Dfn. 2), the class labelyv and original features xv
of a node and those of its neighboring nodes {(yu, xu) : u∈ ¯N(v)} (esp. the direct neighbors
¯N1(v)) may be different. However, the typical GCN design that mixes the embeddings through an
average [17] or weighted average [36] as the COMBINE function results in ﬁnal embeddings that are
similar across neighboring nodes (especially within a community or cluster) for any set of original
features [28]. While this may work well in the case of homophily, where neighbors likely belong to
the same cluster and class, it poses severe challenges in the case of heterophily: it is not possible to
distinguish neighbors from different classes based on the (similar) learned representations. Choosing
a COMBINE function that separates the representations of each node v and its neighbors ¯N(v) allows
for more expressiveness, where the skipped or non-aggregated representations can evolve separately
over multiple rounds of propagation without becoming prohibitively similar.
Theoretical Justiﬁcation. We prove theoretically that, under some conditions, a GCN layer that
co-embeds ego- and neighbor-features is less capable of generalizing to heterophily than a layer that
embeds them separately. We measure its generalization ability by its robustness to test/train data
deviations. We give the proof of the theorem in App. C.1. Though the theorem applies to speciﬁc
conditions, our empirical analysis shows that it holds in more general cases (§ 5).
Theorem 1 Consider a graphG without self-loops (§ 2) with node features xv = onehot(yv) for
each node v, and an equal number of nodes per class y∈Y in the training setTV. Also assume that
all nodes inTV have degree d, and proportion h of their neighbors belong to the same class, while
proportion 1−h
|Y|−1 of them belong to any other class (uniformly). Then for h < 1−|Y|+2d
2|Y|d , a simple
GCN layer formulated as (A + I)XW is less robust, i.e., misclassiﬁes a node for smaller train/test
data deviations, than a AXW layer that separates the ego- and neighbor-embeddings.
Observations. In Table 1, we observe that GCN, GAT, and MixHop, which ‘mix’ the ego- and
neighbor-embeddings explicitly1, perform poorly in the heterophily setting. On the other hand,
GraphSAGE that separates the embeddings (e.g., it concatenates the two embeddings and then applies
a non-linear transformation) achieves 33-40% better performance in this setting.
3.1.2 (D2) Higher-order Neighborhoods
The second design involves explicitly aggregating information from higher-order neighborhoods in
each round k, beyond the immediate neighbors of each node:
r(k)
v = COMBINE
(
r(k−1)
v , AGGR({r(k−1)
u :u ∈ N1(v) }), AGGR({r(k−1)
u :u ∈ N2(v) }),...
)
(3)
where Ni(v) denotes the neighbors of v at exactly i hops away, and the AGGR functions applied to
different neighborhoods can be the same or different. This design—employed in GCN-Cheby [ 7] and
MixHop [1]—augments the implicit aggregation over higher-order neighborhoods that most GNN
models achieve through multiple rounds of ﬁrst-order propagation based on variants of Eq. (2).
Intuition. To show why higher-order neighborhoods help in the heterophily settings, we ﬁrst deﬁne
homophily-dominant and heterophily-dominant neighborhoods:
Deﬁnition 3 N(v) is expectedly homophily-dominant if P (yu = yv|yv)≥ P (yu = y|yv),∀u∈
N(v) and y∈Y̸ = yv. If the opposite inequality holds, N(v) is expectedly heterophily-dominant.
From this deﬁnition, we can see that expectedly homophily-dominant neighborhoods are more
beneﬁcial for GNN layers, as in such neighborhoods the class label yv of each node v can in
expectation be determined by the majority of the class labels in N(v). In the case of heterophily, we
have seen empirically that although the immediate neighborhoods may be heterophily-dominant, the
higher-order neighborhoods may be homophily-dominant and thus provide more relevant context.
This observation is also conﬁrmed by recent works [2, 6] in the context of binary attribute prediction.
1 These models consider self-loops, which turn each ego also into a neighbor, and thus mix the ego- and
neighbor-representations. E.g., GCN and MixHop operate on the symmetric normalized adjacency matrix
augmented with self-loops: ˆA = ˆD− 1
2 (A + I) ˆD− 1
2, where I is the identity and ˆD the degree matrix of A + I.
4