Theoretical Justiﬁcation. Below we formalize the above observation for 2-hop neighborhoods under
non-binary attributes (labels), and prove one case when they are homophily-dominant in App. C.2:
Theorem 2 Consider a graphG without self-loops (§ 2) with label setY, where for each node v,
its neighbors’ class labels{yu : u∈ N(v)} are conditionally independent given yv, and P (yu =
yv|yv) = h, P (yu = y|yv) = 1−h
|Y|−1 ,∀y̸= yv. Then, the 2-hop neighborhood N2(v) for a node v
will always be homophily-dominant in expectation.
Observations. Under heterophily (h = 0.1), GCN-Cheby, which models different neighborhoods by
combining Chebyshev polynomials to approximate a higher-order graph convolution operation [7],
outperforms GCN and GAT, which aggregate over only the immediate neighborsN1, by up to +31%
(Table 1). MixHop, which explicitly models 1-hop and 2-hop neighborhoods (though ‘mixes’ the
ego- and neighbor-embeddings1, violating design D1), also outperforms these two models.
3.1.3 (D3) Combination of Intermediate Representations
The third design combines the intermediate representations of each node at the ﬁnal layer:
r(ﬁnal)
v = COMBINE
(
r(1)
v , r(2)
v ,..., r(K)
v
)
(4)
to explicitly capture local and global information via COMBINE functions that leverage each represen-
tation separately–e.g., concatenation, LSTM-attention [38]. This design is introduced in jumping
knowledge networks [38] and shown to increase the representation power of GCNs under homophily.
Intuition. Intuitively, each round collects information with different locality—earlier rounds are more
local, while later rounds capture increasingly more global information (implicitly, via propagation).
Similar to D2 (which models explicit neighborhoods), this design models the distribution of neighbor
representations in low-homophily networks more accurately. It also allows the class prediction to
leverage different neighborhood ranges in different networks, adapting to their structural properties.
Theoretical Justiﬁcation. The beneﬁt of combining intermediate representations can be theoretically
explained from the spectral perspective. Assuming a GCN-style layer—where propagation can be
viewed as spectral ﬁltering—, the higher order polynomials of the normalized adjacency matrix
A is a low-pass ﬁlter [37], so intermediate outputs from earlier rounds contain higher-frequency
components than outputs from later rounds. At the same time, the following theorem holds for graphs
with heterophily, where we view class labels as graph signals (as in graph signal processing):
Theorem 3 Consider graph signals (label vectors) s, t∈{ 0, 1}|V| deﬁned on an undirected graph
G with edge homophily ratios hs and ht, respectively. If hs < ht, then signal s has higher energy
(Dfn. 5) in high-frequency components than t in the spectrum of unnormalized graph Laplacian L.
In other words, in heterophily settings, the label distribution contains more information at higher than
lower frequencies (see proof in App. C.3). Thus, by combining the intermediate outputs from different
layers, this design captures both low- and high-frequency components in the ﬁnal representation,
which is critical in heterophily settings, and allows for more expressiveness in the general setting.
Observations. By concatenating the intermediate representations from two rounds with the embedded
ego-representation (following the jumping knowledge framework [38]), GCN’s accuracy increases to
58.93%±3.17 for h = 0.1, a 20% improvement over its counterpart without design D3 (Table 1).
Summary of designs To sum up, D1 models (at each layer) the ego- and neighbor-representations
distinctly, D2 leverages (at each layer) representations of neighbors at different distances distinctly,
and D3 leverages (at the ﬁnal layer) the learned ego-representations at previous layersdistinctly.
3.2 H 2GCN: A Framework for Networks with Homophily or Heterophily
We now describe H2GCN , which exempliﬁes how effectively combining designs D1-D3 can help
better adapt to the whole spectrum of low-to-high homophily, while avoiding interference with other
designs. It has three stages (Alg. 1, App. D): (S1) feature embedding, (S2) neighborhood aggregation,
and (S3) classiﬁcation.
The feature embedding stage (S1) uses a graph-agnostic dense layer to generate for each node v the
feature embedding r(0)
v ∈ Rp based on its ego-feature xv: r(0)
v =σ(xvWe), where σ is an optional
non-linear function, and We ∈ RF×p is a learnable weight matrix.
5