12 Zhang et al.
or harmful ( Denoising) for imitating the expert and this determines whether
features or learning from scratch performs best. Table 3c shows that regardless
of the which approach worked best, side-tuning consistently matched or beat it.
Reinforcement Learning for Navigation in Habitat. Using a diﬀerent
learning algorithm (PPO) and direct interaction instead of expert trajectories,
we observe identical trends. We trained agents directly in Habitat (74 build-
ings). Table 3d shows performance in 14 held-out buildings after 10M frames of
training. Side-tuning performs comparably to the max of competing approaches.
4.4 Learning Mechanics in Side-Tuning
Using non-network base models. Since side-tuning treats the base model is
a black box, it can be used even when the base model is not a neural network. On
iTaskonomy, we show that side-tuning can eﬀectively use ground truth curvature
as a base for incremental learning whereas all the methods we compare against
cannot use this information (with the exception of feature extraction). Speciﬁ-
cally, we resize the curvature image from 256×256×2 to 32×32×2 and reshape
it to 16×16×8, the same size as the output of other base models. Side-tuning
with ground truth curvature achieves a better rank (4.3) on iTaskonomy than
all 20 other methods (excluding Independent, 4.2)
Beneﬁts for intermediate amounts of data. We showed in the previous
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Number of Expert Trajectories (log scale)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9Reward
Imitation Learning (Denoising)
Sidetune
Scratch
Features
Finetune
Fig. 7. Side-tuning outperformed
features and ﬁne-tuning on inter-
mediate amounts of data.Using im-
itation learning on a point-goal naviga-
tion task (setup from [19]).
section that side-tuning performs like the
best of {features, ﬁne-tuning, scratch} in
domains with abundant or scant data.
In order to test whether side-tuning
could proﬁtably synthesize the features
with intermediate amounts of data, we
evaluated each approach’s ability to learn
to navigate using 49, 490, 4900, or 49k
expert trajectories and pretrained denois-
ing features. Side-tuning was always the
best-performing approach and, on inter-
mediate amounts of data (e.g. 4.9k trajec-
tories), outperformed the other techniques
(side-tune 9.3, ﬁne-tune: 7.5, features: 6.7,
scratch: 6.6), Figure 7).
Network size. We ﬁnd that when the base network is large, distilling it into
a smaller network andsidetuning will still retain most of the performance. In Fig-
ure 8, we explore this in Habitat (RL using {curvature, denoise}→ navigation),
with other results in the supplementary.
More than just stable updates. In RL, ﬁne-tuning often fails to improve
performance. One common rationalization is that the early updates in RL are
‘high variance’. The common stage-wise solution is to ﬁrst train using ﬁxed
features and then unfreeze the weights. We found that this approach performs as
well (but no better than) using ﬁxed features–and side-tuning performed as well
as both while not being domain-speciﬁc (Fig. 8). We tested the ‘high-variance’