Side-Tuning: A Baseline for Network Adaptation
via Additive Side Networks
Jeﬀrey O. Zhang 1, Alexander Sax 1, Amir Zamir 3, Leonidas Guibas 2, and
Jitendra Malik1
1 UC Berkeley
2 Stanford University
3 Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)
http://sidetuning.berkeley.edu
Abstract. When training a neural network for a desired task, one may
prefer to adapt a pre-trained network rather than starting from ran-
domly initialized weights. Adaptation can be useful in cases when train-
ing data is scarce, when a single learner needs to perform multiple tasks,
or when one wishes to encode priors in the network. The most commonly
employed approaches for network adaptation are ﬁne-tuning and using
the pre-trained network as a ﬁxed feature extractor, among others.
In this paper, we propose a straightforward alternative: side-tuning.
Side-tuning adapts a pre-trained network by training a lightweight “side”
network that is fused with the (unchanged) pre-trained network via sum-
mation. This simple method works as well as or better than existing
solutions and it resolves some of the basic issues with ﬁne-tuning, ﬁxed
features, and other common approaches. In particular, side-tuning is less
prone to overﬁtting, is asymptotically consistent, and does not suﬀer
from catastrophic forgetting in incremental learning. We demonstrate
the performance of side-tuning under a diverse set of scenarios, including
incremental learning (iCIFAR, iTaskonomy), reinforcement learning, im-
itation learning (visual navigation in Habitat), NLP question-answering
(SQuAD v2), and single-task transfer learning (Taskonomy), with con-
sistently promising results.
Keywords: sidetuning, ﬁnetuning, transfer learning, representation learn-
ing, lifelong learning, incremental learning, continual learning
1 Introduction
The goal of side-tuning (and generally network adaptation) is to capitalize on
a pretrained model to better learn one or more novel tasks. The side-tuning
approach is straightforward: it assumes access to a given (base) modelB : X→ Y
that maps the inputx onto some representationy. Side-tuning then learns a side
model S : X→ Y, so that the curated representations for the target task are
R(x) ≜ B(x)⊕S(x),
arXiv:1912.13503v4  [cs.LG]  31 Jul 2020