6 Zhang et al.
3.2 Side-Tuning for Incremental Learning
We often care about the performance not only on the current target task but also
on the previously learned tasks. This is the case for incremental learning, where
we want an agent that can learn a sequence of tasks T1,...,Tm and is capable
of reasonable performance across the entire set at the end of training. In this
paradigm, catastrophic forgetting (diminished performance on{T1,...,Tm−1} due
to learningTm) becomes a major issue.
In our experiments, we dedicate one new side network to each task. We
deﬁne a task T : x ↦→ P (Y ) as a mapping from inputs, x, to a probability
distribution over the output space, Y . For example,x is an RGB image mapped
to probabilities over object classes, Y . Datasets for a task are a set of pairs
{(x,y )| y∼T (x)}. For taskTt, our loss function is
L(xt,yt) =∥Dt(αtB(xt) + (1−αt)St(xt))−yt∥
wheret is the task number andDt is some decoder readout of the side-tuning
representation. This simple approach leads to the training curve in Figure 3 with
no possible catastrophic forgetting. Furthermore, since side-tuning is indepen-
dent of task order, training does not slow down as training progresses. We observe
that this approach provides a strong baseline for incremental learning, outper-
forming existing approaches in the literature while using fewer parameters on
more tasks (in Section 4.2).
Training (Tasks)
Loss
Fig. 3. Theoretical learning curve
of side-tuning. The model learns dur-
ing task-speciﬁc training and those
weights are subsequently frozen, pre-
serving performance.
Side-tuning naturally handles other
continuous learning scenarios besides in-
cremental learning. A related problem is
that of continuous adaptation, where the
agent needs to perform well (e.g. mini-
mizing regret) on a stream of tasks with
undeﬁned boundaries and where there
might very little data per task and no
task repeats. As we show in Section 4.2,
inﬂexibility becomes a serious problem
for constraint-based methods and task-
speciﬁc performance declines after learning
more than a handful of tasks. Moreover,
continuous adaptation requires an online method as task boundaries must be
detected and data cannot be replayed (e.g. to generate constraints for EWC).
Side-tuning could be applied to continuous adaptation by keeping a small
working memory of cheap side networks that constantly adapt the base network
to the input task. These side networks are small, easy to train, and when one
of the networks begins performing poorly (e.g. signaling a distribution shift)
that network can simply be discarded. This is an online approach, and online
adaptation with small cheap networks has found recent success (e.g. in [20]).