Side-Tuning: A Baseline for Network Adaptation via Additive Side Networks 5
3.1 Architectural Elements
Base Model. The base modelB(x) provides some core cognition or perception,
and we put no restrictions on howB(x) is computed. We never updateB(x), and
in our approach it has zero learnable parameters. B(x) could be a decision tree
or an oracle for another task (experiments with this setup shown in Section 4.4).
We consider several choices for B(x) in Section 4.4, but the simplest choice is
just a pretrained network.
Side Model. Unlike the base model, the side network, S(x), is updated
during training; learning a residual that we apply on top the base representation.
One crucial component of the framework is that the complexity of the side
network can scale to the diﬃculty of the problem at hand. When the base is
relevant and requires only a minor update, a very simple side network can suﬃce.
Since the side networks role is to amend the base network to a new task, we
initialize the side network as a copy of the base. When the forms of the base and
side networks diﬀer, we initialize the side network through knowledge distilla-
tion [9]. We investigate side network design decisions in Sec. 4.4. In general, we
found side-tuning to perform well in a variety of settings and setups.
Combining Base and Side Representations.
Side-tuning admits many options for the combination operator, ⊕, and we
compare several in Section 4.5. We observe that alpha blending,B(x)⊕S(x) ≜αB(x)+
(1−α)S(x), where α is treated as a learnable parameter works well and α cor-
relates with task relevance (see Section 4.4).
While simple, alpha blending is expressive enough that it encompasses several
common transfer learning approaches. As shown in Figure 2(iii), side-tuning is
equivalent to feature extraction whenα = 1. Whenα = 0, side-tuning is instead
equivalent to ﬁne-tuning if the side network has the same architecture the base.
If we allow α to vary during training, then switching α from 1 to 0 is equivalent
to the common (stage-wise) training curriculum in RL where a policy is trained
on top of some ﬁxed features that are unlocked partway through training.
When minimizing estimation error there is often a tradeoﬀ between the bias
and variance contributions [7] (see Table 1). Feature extraction locks the weights
and corresponds to a point-mass prior while ﬁne-tuning is an uninformative
prior yielding a low-bias high-variance estimator. Side-tuning aims to leverage
the (useful) bias from those original features while making the representation
asymptotically consistent through updates to the residual side-network 5.
Given the bias-variance interpretation, a notable curriculum for α during
training is α(N) = k
k+N for k > 0 (hyperbolic decay) where N is the number
of training epochs. This curriculum, placing less weight on the prior as more
evidence accumulates, is suggestive of a maximum a posteriori estimate and,
like the MAP estimate, it converges to the MLE (ﬁne-tuning).
5 Sidetuning is one way of making features obey Cromwell’s rule: “I beseech you, in
the bowels of Christ, think it possible that you may be mistaken.”