Side-Tuning: A Baseline for Network Adaptation via Additive Side Networks 3
We test side-tuning for incremental learning on iCIFAR and the more chal-
lenging iTaskonomy dataset, which we introduce, ﬁnding that incremental learn-
ing methods that work on iCIFAR often do not work as well in the more de-
manding setup. On these datasets, side-tuning uses side networks that are much
smaller than the base. Consequently, even without consolidation, side-tuning
uses fewer learnable parameters than the alternative methods.
Finally, because side-tuning treats the base model as a black-box, it can be
used with non-network sources of information such as a decision trees or oracle
information on a related task (see Section 4.4). Thus, side-tuning can be applied
even when other model adaptation techniques cannot.
1 Target Task > 1 Target Tasks
Method Low Data High Data (incremental)
Fixed features
 (Info Loss)
 (Info Loss)
Fine-tuning
 (Overﬁt)
 (Forgetting)
Side-tuning
Table 1. Advantages of side-tuning vs. representative alternatives. Fixed fea-
tures provide a ﬁxed representation and if the pretrained model discarded important
information then there is no way to recover the lost details. This often leads to modest
performance. On the other hand, ﬁne-tuning has a large number of learnable param-
eters which leads to overﬁtting. Side-tuning is a simple method that addresses these
limitations with a small number of learnable parameters.
2 Related Work
Broadly speaking, network adaptation methods either overwrite existing param-
eters ( substitutive methods) or freeze them and add new parameters ( additive
learning).
Substitutive Methods modify an existing network to solve a new task
by updating some or all of the network weights (simplest approach being ﬁne-
tuning). A large body of constraint-based methods focuses on how to regular-
ize these updates in order to prevent forgetting earlier tasks. Methods such as
[30,12,15] impose additional constraints for each new task, which slows down
learning on later tasks (see Sec. 4.2 on rigidity, [3]). Other methods such as [4]
relegate each task to approximately orthogonal subspaces but are then unable
to transfer information across tasks. Side-tuning does not require such regular-
ization since the base remains untouched.
Additive Methods methods circumvent forgetting by freezing the weights
and adding a small number of new parameters per task. One economical ap-
proach is to use oﬀ-the-shelf-features with one or more readout layers [32]. How-
ever, oﬀ-the-shelf features cannot be updated for the new task, and so recent
work has focused on how features can be modulated by applying per-task learned
weight masks [17,28], by pruning [18], or by hard attention [31].
If information is missing from the original features, then recovering that
information might require adding additional weights. Works such as [29,14] in-
troduce a new network with independent access to the input and connect to