4 Zhang et al.
various layers from the original network. Other works like [24,1,25] learn task-
dependent parameters (e.g. separate batch norm, linear layers) that are inserted
directly into the existing network. Tying the new weights directly into the orig-
inal network architecture often requires making restrictive assumptions about
the original network architecture (e.g. that it must be a ResNet [8]).
Unlike these previous works, side-tuning uses only late fusion and makes no
assumptions about the base network. This means it can be applied on a larger
class of models. While simpler, the results suggest that side-tuning oﬀers similar
or better performance to the more complex alternatives and calls into question
whether that complexity buys much in practice.
Residual Learning exploits the fact that it is often easier to approximate
a diﬀerence rather than the original function. This has been successfully used in
ResNets [8] where a residual is learned on top of the identity function prior. Some
network adaptation methods insert new residual-modeling parameters directly
into the base architecture [14,24]. Residual learning has also been explored in
robotics as residual RL [10,33], in which we train an agent for a single task by
ﬁrst taking a coarse policy (e.g. behavior cloning) and then training a residual
network on top (using RL). For a single task, iteratively learning residuals is
known as gradient boosting, but side-tuning adds a side network to adapt a
base representation for a new task. We discuss the relationship in Sec. 4.4.
Meta-learning, unlike network adaptation approaches, seeks to create net-
works that are inherently adaptable. Typically this proceeds by training on tasks
sampled from a known task distribution. Side-tuning is fundamentally compat-
ible with this formulation and with existing approaches (e.g. [6]). Recent work
suggests that these approaches work primarily by feature adaptation rather than
rapid learning [22], and feature adaptation is also the motivation for our method.
3 Side-Tuning: The Simplest Additive Approach
Side-tuning learns a side model S(x) and combines it with a pre-trained base
model B(x). The representation for the target task is R(x) ≜ B(x)⊕S(x).
i. Train base ii. Sidetuning
1
0
Training
iii.    -curriculum
Features
Finetune
Stagewise
MAP 
Fig. 2. Mechanics of side-tuning. (i) Side-tuning takes some core network and
adapts it to a new task by training a side network. (ii) Connectivity structure when
using side-tuning along withα-blending. (iii) Some of the existing common adaptation
methods turn out to be special cases of an alpha blending with a side network. In
particular: ﬁne-tuning, feature extraction, and other approaches are side-tuning with
a ﬁxed curriculum on the blending parameter α, as shown in the plot.