14 Zhang et al.
Avg. Rank (↓)
Method iTaskonomy
Product (Element-wise) 3.64
Summation (α-blending) 2.27
MLP ([29]) 2.18
FiLM [21] 1.91
Table 4. Average rank of various
merge methods. Alternative feature-wise
transformations did not outperform simple
α-blending in a statistically signiﬁcant way.
Avg. Rank (↓)
Method iTaskonomy
Base-Only 2.55
Side-Only 2.10
Side-tuning 1.36
Table 5. Both base and side net-
works contribute. Performance
(average rank on iTaskonomy) im-
proved when using both the base and
side model in side-tuning.
work slightly outperforms a low-energy initialization 9, which slightly outper-
forms Xavier initialization. However, we found that these diﬀerences were not
statistically signiﬁcant across tasks (H0 : pretrained= xavier;p = 0.07, Wilcoxon
signed-rank test). We suspect that initialization might be more important on
harder problems. We test this by repeating the analysis without the simple
texture-based tasks (2D keypoint + edge detection and autoencoding) and ﬁnd
the diﬀerence in initialization is now signiﬁcant ( p = 0.01).
5 Conclusions and Limitations
We have introduced the side-tuning framework, a simple yet eﬀective approach
for additive learning . Since it does not suﬀer from catastrophic forgetting or
rigidity, it is naturally suited to incremental learning. The theoretical advantages
are reﬂected in empirical results, and we found side-tuning to perform on par
with or better than many current incremental learning approaches, while being
signiﬁcantly simpler. Experiments demonstrated this in challenging contexts and
with various state-of-the-art neural networks across multiple domains.
More complex methods should need to demonstrate clear improvements over
simply doing this na¨ ıve approach. We see several natural ways to improve it:
Better forward transfer : Our experiments used only a single base and single
side network. Leveraging previously trained side networks could yield better
performance on later tasks.
Learning when to deploy side networks : Like most incremental learning se-
tups, we assumed that the tasks are presented in a sequence and that task iden-
tities are known. Using several active side networks in tandem would provide a
natural way to identify task change or distribution shift.
Using side-tuning to measure task relevance : We found that α tracked task
relevance in [34], but a more rigorous treatment of the interaction between the
base, side, α and ﬁnal performance could yield insight into how tasks relate.
Acknowledgements: This material is based upon work supported by ONR MURI
(N00014-14-1-0671), Vannevar Bush Faculty Fellowship, an Amazon AWS Machine
Learning Award, NSF (IIS-1763268), a BDD grant and TRI. Toyota Research Institute
(“TRI”) provided funds to assist the authors with research but this article solely reﬂects
the opinions and conclusions of its authors and not TRI or any other Toyota entity.
9 Side network is trained to not impact the output. Full details in the supplementary.