8 Zhang et al.
Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC). A constraint-based substitutive approach
from [12]. We use the formulation from [30] which scales better.
Parameter Superposition (PSP) : A parameter-masking substitutive approach
from [4] that attempts to make tasks independent from one another by mapping
the weights to approximately orthogonal spaces.
Progressive Neural Network (PNN): An additive approach from [29] which uti-
lizes many lateral connections between the base and side networks. Requires the
architecture of the base and side networks to be the same or similar.
Piggyback (PB): Learns task-dependent binary weight masks [17].
Residual Adapters (RA): An additive approach which learns task-dependent batch-
norm and linear layers between layers in an existing network [24,25].
Independent: Each task uses a pretrained network trained independently for that
task. This method uses far more learnable parameters than all the alternatives
(e.g. saving a separate ResNet-50 for each task) and achieves strong performance.
4.2 Incremental Learning
On both the incremental Taskonomy [34] (iTaskonomy) and incremental CIFAR
(iCIFAR [26]) datasets, side-tuning performs competitively against existing in-
cremental learning approaches while using fewer parameters6. On the more chal-
lenging Taskonomy dataset, it outperforms other approaches.
– iCIFAR. Comprises 10 subsequent tasks by partitioning CIFAR-100 [26]
into 10 disjoint sets of 10-classes each. Images are 32 ×32 RGB. First, we
pretrain the base network (ResNet-44) on CIFAR-10. We then train on each
subtask for 20k steps before moving to the next one. The SotA substitutive
baselines (EWC and PSP) update the base network for each task (683K
parameters), while side-tuning updates a four layer convolutional network
per task (259K parameters after 10 tasks).
– iTaskonomy. Taskonomy [34] is signiﬁcantly more challenging than CIFAR-
100 and includes multiple computer vision tasks beyond object classiﬁcation:
including 2D (e.g. edge detection), 3D (e.g. surface normal estimation), and
semantic (e.g. object classiﬁcation) tasks. We note that approaches which
work well on iCIFAR often do quite poorly in the more realistic setting.
We created iTaskonomy by selecting all (12) tasks that make predictions
from a single RGB image, and then created an incremental learning setup
by selecting a random order in which to learn these tasks (starting with
curvature). The images are 256×256 and we use a ResNet-50 for the base
network and a 5-layer convolutional network for theside-tuning side network.
The number of learnable network parameters used across all tasks is 24.6M
for EWC and PSP, and 11.0M for side-tuning7.
6 Full experimental details (e.g. architecture) provided in the supplementary.
7 Numbers not counting readout parameters, which are common between all methods.