2 Zhang et al.
for some combining operation⊕. For example, choosingB(x)⊕S(x) ≜αB(x) +
(1−α)S(x) (commonly called α-blending) reduces the side-tuning approach to:
ﬁne-tuning, feature extraction, and stage-wise training, depending on α (Fig. 2,
right). Hence those can be viewed as special cases of the side-tuning approach
(Figure 1).
Fixed Features Fine-Tune Side-Tune
Fig. 1. The side-tuning framework vs. common alternatives ﬁne-tuning and
ﬁxed features. Given a pre-trained network that should be adapted to a new task,
ﬁne-tuning re-trains the weights in the pretrained network and ﬁxed feature extraction
trains a readout function with no re-training of the pre-trained weights. In contrast,
Side-tuning adapts the pre-trained network by training a lightweight conditioned “side”
network that is fused with the (unchanged) pre-trained network using summation.
Side-tuning is an example of anadditive learning approach, one that adds new
parameters for each new task. Since side-tuning does not change the base model,
it, by design, adapts to a target task without degrading performance on the base
task. Unlike many other additive approaches, side-tuning places no constraints
on the structure of the base model or side network, allowing for the architecture
and sizes to vary independently. In particular, while other approaches require the
side network to scale with the base network, side-tuning can use tiny networks
when the base only requires minor updates. By adding fewer parameters per
task, side-tuning can learn more tasks before the model grows large enough to
require parameter consolidation.
Substitutive methods instead opt for a single large model that is updated on
each task. These methods often require adding additional constraints per-task
in order to prevent inter-task interference [12,30]. Side-tuning does not require
such regularization since the base remains untouched.
Compared to existing state-of-the-art network adaptation and incremen-
tal learning 4 approaches, we ﬁnd that the more complex methods perform no
better—and often worse—than side-tuning.
This straightforward mechanism deals with the key challenges of incremental
learning (Sec. 4.2). Namely, it does not suﬀer from either:
– Catastrophic forgetting : tendency of a network to lose previously learned
knowledge upon learning new information.
– Rigidity : Increasing inability of a network to adapt to new problems as
it accrues constraints from previous problems. Note: Incremental learning
literature sometimes calls this intransigence [2]. We prefer rigidity as it is
clear and widely used in psychology, dating back over 70 years [27,13].
4 Also referred to as lifelong or continual learning.