PDF p3 selected FedAvg/FedOpt method
A common approach to solving (1) in federated settings is FEDAVG (McMahan et al., 2017). At each
round of FEDAVG, a subset of clients are selected (typically randomly) and the server broadcasts its
global model to each client. In parallel, the clients run SGD on their own loss function, and send the
resulting model to the server. The server then updates its global model as the average of these local
models. See Algorithm 3 in the appendix for more details.
Suppose that at roundt, the server has modelxt and samples a setS of clients. Letxt
i denote the
model of each clienti∈S after local training. We rewrite FEDAVG’s update as
xt+1 = 1
|S|
∑
i∈S
xt
i =xt− 1
|S|
∑
i∈S
(
xt−xt
i
)
.
Let ∆t
i :=xt
i−xt and ∆t := (1/|S|) ∑
i∈S ∆t
i. Then the server update in FEDAVG is equivalent to
applying SGD to the “pseudo-gradient” −∆t with learning rateη = 1. This formulation makes it
clear that other choices ofη are possible. One could also utilize optimizers other than SGD on the
clients, or use an alternative update rule on the server. This family of algorithms, which we refer to
collectively as FEDOPT, is formalized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 FEDOPTFEDOPTFEDOPT
1: Input:x0, CLIENT OPT, SERVER OPT
2: fort = 0,··· ,T − 1 do
3: Sample a subsetS of clients
4: xt
i,0 =xt
5: for each clienti∈S in parallel do
6: fork = 0,··· ,K− 1 do
7: Compute an unbiased estimategt
i,k of∇Fi(xt
i,k)
8: xt
i,k+1 = CLIENT OPT(xt
i,k,gt
i,k,ηl,t )
9: ∆t
i =xt
i,K−xt
10: ∆t = 1
|S|
∑
i∈S ∆t
i
11: xt+1 = SERVER OPT(xt,−∆t,η,t )
In Algorithm 1, CLIENT OPT and SERVER OPT are gradient-based optimizers with learning rates
ηl andη respectively. Intuitively, CLIENT OPT aims to minimize (1) based on each client’s local
data while SERVER OPT optimizes from a global perspective. FEDOPT naturally allows the use of
adaptive optimizers (eg. ADAM, YOGI, etc.), as well as techniques such as server-side momentum
(leading to FEDAVGM, proposed by Hsu et al. (2019)). In its most general form, FEDOPT uses a
CLIENT OPT whose updates can depend on globally aggregated statistics (e.g. server updates in the
3
PDF p4 selected continuation
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
previous iterations). We also allowη andηl to depend on the roundt in order to encompass learning
rate schedules. While we focus on speciﬁc adaptive optimizers in this work, we can in principle use
any adaptive optimizer (e.g. AMSG RAD (Reddi et al., 2019), ADABOUND (Luo et al., 2019)).
While FEDOPT has intuitive beneﬁts overFEDAVG, it also raises a fundamental question: Can the
negative of the average model difference∆t be used as a pseudo-gradient in general server optimizer
updates? In this paper, we provide an afﬁrmative answer to this question by establishing a theoretical
basis for FEDOPT. We will show that the use of the termSERVER OPT is justiﬁed, as we can guarantee
convergence across a wide variety of server optimizers, including ADAGRAD , ADAM, and YOGI,
thus developing principled adaptive optimizers for FL based on our framework.
3 A DAPTIVE FEDERATED OPTIMIZATION
In this section, we specialize FEDOPT to settings where SERVER OPT is an adaptive optimization
method (one of ADAGRAD , YOGI or ADAM) and CLIENT OPT is SGD. By using adaptive methods
(which generally require maintaining state) on the server and SGD on the clients, we ensure our
methods have the same communication cost as FEDAVG and work in cross-device settings.
