Figure 1. Illustration of edge-conditioned convolution on a directed subgraph. The feature X l(1) on vertex 1 in the l-th network layer is
computed as a weighted sum of features X l−1(.) on the set of its predecessor vertices, assuming self-loops. The particular weight matrices
are dynamically generated by ﬁlter-generating network F l based on the corresponding edge labels L(.), visualized as colors.
Spectral Methods. A mathematically sound deﬁnition of
convolution operator makes use of the spectral analysis the-
ory, where it corresponds to multiplication of the signal
on vertices transformed into the spectral domain by graph
Fourier transform. The spatial locality of ﬁlters is then
given by smoothness of the spectral ﬁlters, in case of [
6]
modeled as B-splines. The transform involves very expen-
sive multiplications with the eigenvector matrix. However,
by a parameterization of ﬁlters as Chebyshev polynomials
of eigenvalues and their approximate evaluation, computa-
tionally efﬁcient and localized ﬁltering has been recently
achieved by Defferrard et al. [
11]. Nevertheless, the ﬁl-
ters are still learned in the context of the spectrum of graph
Laplacian, which therefore has to be the same for all graphs
in a dataset. This means that the graph structure is ﬁxed
and only the signal deﬁned on the vertices may differ. This
precludes applications on problems where the graph struc-
ture varies in the dataset, such as meshes, point clouds, or
diverse biochemical datasets.
To cover these important cases, we formulate our ﬁlter-
ing approach in the spatial domain, where the limited com-
plexity of evaluation and the localization property is pro-
vided by construction. The main challenge here is dealing
with weight sharing among local neighborhoods [
6], as the
number of vertices adjacent to a particular vertex varies and
their ordering is often not well deﬁnable.
Spatial Methods. Bruna et al. [
6] assumed ﬁxed graph
structure and did not share any weights among neighbor-
hoods. Several works have independently dealt with this
problem. Duvenaud et al. [
14] sum the signal over neigh-
boring vertices followed by a weight matrix multiplication,
effectively sharing the same weights among all edges. At-
wood and Towsley [
2] share weights based on the number
of hops between two vertices. Kipf and Welling [ 20] fur-
ther approximate the spectral method of [ 11] and weaken
the dependency on the Laplacian, but ultimately arrive at
center-surround weighting of neighborhoods. None of these
methods captures ﬁner structure of the neighborhood and
thus does not generalize the standard convolution on grids.
In contrast, our method can make use of possible edge la-
bels and is shown to generalize regular convolution (Sec-
tion
3.2).
The approach of Niepert et al. [27] introduces a heuristic
for linearizing selected graph neighborhoods so that a con-
ventional 1D CNN can be used. We share their goal of cap-
turing structure in neighborhoods but approach it in a differ-
ent way. Finally, Graph neural networks [
33, 23] propagate
features across a graph until (near) convergence and exploit
edge labels as one of the sources of information as we do.
However, their system is quite different from the current
multilayer feed-forward architectures, making the reuse of
today’s common building blocks not straightforward.
CNNs on Point Clouds and Meshes. There has been lit-
tle work on deep learning on point clouds or meshes. Masci
et al. [
24] deﬁne convolution over patch descriptors around
every vertex of a 3D mesh using geodesic distances, formu-
lated in a deep learning architecture. The only way of pro-
cessing point clouds using deep learning has been to ﬁrst
3694
