Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
concatenation a = [a1∥a2]∈ R2d′
such that a1, a2∈ Rd′
, and Equation (2) can be re-written as:
e (hi, hj) = LeakyReLU
(
a⊤
1 W hi + a⊤
2 W hj
)
(5)
SinceV is ﬁnite, there exists a nodejmax∈V such that a⊤
2 W hjmax is maximal among all nodes
j∈V (jmax is the jf required by Deﬁnition 3.1). Due to the monotonicity of LeakyReLU and
softmax, for every query nodei∈V , the nodejmax also leads to the maximal value of its attention
distribution{αij|j∈V} . Thus, from Deﬁnition 3.1 directly,α computes only static attention. This
also implies thatα does not compute dynamic attention, because in GAT, Deﬁnition 3.2 holds only
for constant mappingsϕ that map all inputs to the same output.
The consequence of Theorem 1 is that for any set of nodesV and a trained GAT layer, the attention
functionα deﬁnes a constant ranking (argsort) of the nodes, unconditioned on the query nodes
i. That is, we can denote sj = a⊤
2 W hj and get that for any choice of hi,α is monotonic with
respect to the per-node scores{sj|j∈V} . This global ranking induces the local ranking of every
neighborhoodNi. The only effect of hi is in the “sharpness” of the produced attention distribution.
This is demonstrated in Figure 1a (bottom), where different curves denote different queries (hi).
Generalization to multi-head attention Veliˇckovi´c et al. (2018) found it beneﬁcial to employH
separate attention heads and concatenate their outputs, similarly to Transformers. In this case,
Theorem 1 holds for each head separately: every headh∈ [H] has a (possibly different) node that
maximizes{s(h)
j |j∈V} , and the output is the concatenation ofH static attention heads.
3.3 B UILDING DYNAMIC GRAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS
To create a dynamic graph attention network, we modify the order of internal operations in GAT and
introduce GATv2 – a simple ﬁx of GAT that has a strictly more expressive attention mechanism.
GATv2 The main problem in the standard GAT scoring function (Equation (2)) is that the learned
layers W and a are applied consecutively, and thus can be collapsed into a single linear layer. To ﬁx
this limitation, we simply apply the a layer after the nonlinearity (LeakyReLU), and the W layer
after the concatenation, 5 effectively applying an MLP to compute the score for each query-key pair:
GAT (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018): e (hi, hj) =LeakyReLU
(
a⊤· [W hi∥W hj]
)
(6)
GATv2 (our ﬁxed version): e (hi, hj) =a⊤LeakyReLU (W· [hi∥hj]) (7)
The simple modiﬁcation makes a signiﬁcant difference in the expressiveness of the attention function:
Theorem 2. A GATv2 layer computes dynamic attention for any set of node representations K =
Q ={h1,..., hn} .
We prove Theorem 2 in Appendix A. The main idea is that we can deﬁne an appropriate function
that GATv2 will be a universal approximator (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik, 1991) of. In contrast, GAT
(Equation (52)) cannot approximate any such desired function (Theorem 1).
Complexity GATv2 has the same time-complexity as GAT’s declared complexity:O (|V|dd′ +|E|d′).
However, by merging its linear layers, GAT can be computed faster than stated by Veliˇckovi´c et al.
(2018). For a detailed time- and parametric-complexity analysis, see Appendix G.
4 E VALUATION
First, we demonstrate the weakness of GAT using a simple synthetic problem that GAT cannot even ﬁt
(cannot even achieve high training accuracy), but is easily solvable by GATv2 (Section 4.1). Second,
we show that GATv2 is much morerobust to edge noise, because its dynamic attention mechanisms
allow it to decay noisy (false) edges, while GAT’s performance severely decreases as noise increases
(Section 4.2). Finally, we compare GAT and GATv2 across 12 benchmarks overall. (Sections 4.3
to 4.6 and appendix D.3). We ﬁnd that GAT is inferior to GATv2 across all examined benchmarks.
5We also add a bias vector b before applying the nonlinearity, we omit this in Equation (7) for brevity.
5