Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
that has a universal approximator attention function, and is thus strictly more expressive than GAT.
The effect of ﬁxing the attention function in GATv2 is demonstrated in Figure 1b.
In summary, our main contribution is identifying that one of the most popular GNN types, the graph
attention network, does not compute dynamic attention, the kind of attention that it seems to compute.
We introduce formal deﬁnitions for analyzing the expressive power of graph attention mechanisms
(Deﬁnitions 3.1 and 3.2), and derive our claims theoretically (Theorem 1) from the equations of
Veliˇckovi´c et al. (2018). Empirically, we use a synthetic problem to show that standard GAT cannot
express problems that require dynamic attention (Section 4.1). We introduce a simple ﬁx by switching
the order of internal operations in GAT, and propose GATv2, whichdoes compute dynamic attention
(Theorem 2). We further conduct a thorough empirical comparison of GAT and GATv2 and ﬁnd
that GATv2 outperforms GAT across 12 benchmarks of node-, link-, and graph-prediction. For
example, GATv2 outperforms extensively tuned GNNs by over 1.4% in the difﬁcult “UnseenProj
Test” set of the VarMisuse task (Allamanis et al., 2018), without any hyperparameter tuning; and
GATv2 improves over an extensively-tuned GAT by 11.5% in 13 prediction objectives in QM9. In
node-prediction benchmarks from OGB (Hu et al., 2020), not only that GATv2 outperforms GAT
with respect to accuracy – we ﬁnd that dynamic attention provided a much better robustness to noise.
2 P RELIMINARIES
A directed graphG = (V,E) contains nodesV ={1,...,n} and edgesE⊆V×V , where (j,i )∈E
denotes an edge from a node j to a node i. We assume that every node i ∈ Vhas an initial
representation h(0)
i ∈ Rd0. An undirected graph can be represented with bidirectional edges.
2.1 G RAPH NEURAL NETWORKS
A graph neural network (GNN) layer updates every node representation by aggregating its neighbors’
representations. A layer’s input is a set of node representations {hi∈ Rd| i∈V} and the set of
edgesE. A layer outputs a new set of node representations {h′
i∈ Rd′
| i∈V} , where the same
parametric function is applied to every node given its neighborsNi ={j∈V| (j,i )∈E} :
h′
i =fθ (hi, AGGREGATE({hj|j∈N i})) (1)
The design off and AGGREGATE is what mostly distinguishes one type of GNN from the other. For
example, a common variant of GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) performs an element-wise mean
as AGGREGATE, followed by concatenation with hi, a linear layer and a ReLU asf.
2.2 G RAPH ATTENTION NETWORKS
GraphSAGE and many other popular GNN architectures (Xu et al., 2019; Duvenaud et al., 2015)
weigh all neighborsj∈N i with equal importance (e.g., mean or max-pooling as AGGREGATE). To
address this limitation, GAT (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2018) instantiates Equation (1) by computing a learned
weighted average of the representations ofNi. A scoring functione : Rd× Rd→ R computes a score
for every edge (j,i ), which indicates the importance of the features of the neighborj to the nodei:
e (hi, hj) = LeakyReLU
(
a⊤· [W hi∥W hj]
)
(2)
where a∈ R2d′
, W∈ Rd′×d are learned, and∥ denotes vector concatenation. These attention scores
are normalized across all neighborsj∈N i using softmax, and the attention function is deﬁned as:
αij = softmaxj (e (hi, hj)) = exp (e (hi, hj))∑
j′∈Ni exp (e (hi, hj′)) (3)
Then, GAT computes a weighted average of the transformed features of the neighbor nodes (followed
by a nonlinearityσ) as the new representation ofi, using the normalized attention coefﬁcients:
h′
i =σ
(∑
j∈Ni
αij· W hj
)
(4)
From now on, we will refer to Equations (2) to (4) as the deﬁnition of GAT.
3