PAGE 1
Neighbourhood Components Analysis
Jacob Goldberger, Sam Roweis, Geoff Hinton, Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
{jacob,roweis,hinton,rsalakhu}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel method for learning a Mahalanobis
distance measure to be used in the KNN classiﬁcation algorithm. The
algorithm directly maximizes a stochastic variant of the leave-one-out
KNN score on the training set. It can also learn a low-dimensional lin-
ear embedding of labeled data that can be used for data visualization
and fast classiﬁcation. Unlike other methods, our classiﬁcation model
is non-parametric, making no assumptions about the shape of the class
distributions or the boundaries between them. The performance of the
method is demonstrated on several data sets, both for metric learning and
linear dimensionality reduction.
1 Introduction
Nearest neighbor (KNN) is an extremely simple yet surprisingly effective method for clas-
siﬁcation. Its appeal stems from the fact that its decision surfaces are nonlinear, there
is only a single integer parameter (which is easily tuned with cross-validation), and the
expected quality of predictions improves automatically as the amount of training data in-
creases. These advantages, shared by many non-parametric methods, reﬂect the fact that
although the ﬁnal classiﬁcation machine has quite high capacity (since it accesses the entire
reservoir of training data at test time), the trivial learning procedure rarely causes overﬁtting
itself.
However, KNN suffers from two very serious drawbacks. The ﬁrst is computational, since
it must store and search through the entire training set in order to classify a single test point.
(Storage can potentially be reduced by “editing” or “thinning” the training data; and in low
dimensional input spaces, the search problem can be mitigated by employing data structures
such as KD-trees or ball-trees[4].) The second is a modeling issue: how should the distance
metric used to deﬁne the “nearest” neighbours of a test point be deﬁned? In this paper, we
attack both of these difﬁculties by learning a quadratic distance metric which optimizes the
expected leave-one-out classiﬁcation error on the training data when used with a stochastic
neighbour selection rule. Furthermore, we can force the learned distance metric to be low
rank, thus substantially reducing storage and search costs at test time.
2 Stochastic Nearest Neighbours for Distance Metric Learning
We begin with a labeled data set consisting ofn real-valued input vectorsx1, . . . , xn in RD
and corresponding class labels c1, ..., cn. We want to ﬁnd a distance metric that maximizes

PAGE 2
the performance of nearest neighbour classiﬁcation. Ideally, we would like to optimize
performance on future test data, but since we do not know the true data distribution we
instead attempt to optimize leave-one-out (LOO) performance on the training data.
In what follows, we restrict ourselves to learning Mahalanobis (quadratic) distance metrics,
which can always be represented by symmetric positive semi-deﬁnite matrices. We esti-
mate such metrics through their inverse square roots, by learning a linear transformation
of the input space such that in the transformed space, KNN performs well. If we denote
the transformation by a matrix A we are effectively learning a metric Q = A⊤A such that
d(x, y) = ( x − y)⊤Q(x − y) = ( Ax − Ay)⊤(Ax − Ay).
The actual leave-one-out classiﬁcation error of KNN is quite a discontinuous function of the
transformation A, since an inﬁnitesimal change in A may change the neighbour graph and
thus affect LOO classiﬁcation performance by a ﬁnite amount. Instead, we adopt a more
well behaved measure of nearest neighbour performance, by introducing a differentiable
cost function based on stochastic (“soft”) neighbour assignments in the transformed space.
In particular, each pointi selects another point j as its neighbour with some probabilitypij,
and inherits its class label from the point it selects. We deﬁne the pij using a softmax over
Euclidean distances in the transformed space:
pij = exp(−∥Axi − Axj∥2)∑
k̸=i exp(−∥Axi − Axk∥2) , p ii = 0 (1)
Under this stochastic selection rule, we can compute the probability pi that point i will be
correctly classiﬁed (denote the set of points in the same class as i by Ci = {j|ci = cj}):
pi =
∑
j∈Ci
pij (2)
The objective we maximize is the expected number of points correctly classiﬁed under this
scheme:
f (A) =
∑
i
∑
j∈Ci
pij =
∑
i
pi (3)
Differentiating f with respect to the transformation matrix A yields a gradient rule which
we can use for learning (denote xij = xi − xj):
∂f
∂A = −2A
∑
i
∑
j∈Ci
pij(xijx
⊤
ij −
∑
k
pikxikx
⊤
ik) (4)
Reordering the terms we obtain a more efﬁciently computed expression:
∂f
∂A = 2A
∑
i

pi
∑
k
pikxikx
⊤
ik −
∑
j∈Ci
pijxijx
⊤
ij

 (5)
Our algorithm – which we dub Neighbourhood Components Analysis (NCA)– is extremely
simple: maximize the above objective (3) using a gradient based optimizer such as delta-
bar-delta or conjugate gradients. Of course, since the cost function above is not convex,
some care must be taken to avoid local maxima during training. However, unlike many
other objective functions (where good optima are not necessarily deep but rather broad) it
has been our experience that the larger we can drive f during training the better our test
performance will be. In other words, we have never observed an “overtraining” effect.
Notice that by learning the overall scale of A as well as the relative directions of its rows
we are also effectively learning a real-valued estimate of the optimal number of neighbours
(K). This estimate appears as the effective perplexity of the distributionspij. If the learning

PAGE 3
procedure wants to reduce the effective perplexity (consult fewer neighbours) it can scale
up A uniformly; similarly by scaling down all the entries inA it can increase the perplexity
of and effectively average over more neighbours during the stochastic selection.
Maximizing the objective function f (A) is equivalent to minimizing the L1 norm between
the true class distribution (having probability one on the true class) and the stochastic class
distribution induced bypij via A. A natural alternative distance is the KL-divergence which
induces the following objective function:
g(A) =
∑
i
log(
∑
j∈Ci
pij) =
∑
i
log(pi) (6)
Maximizing this objective would correspond to maximizing the probability of obtaining a
perfect (error free) classiﬁcation of the entire training set. The gradient of g(A) is even
simpler than that of f (A):
∂g
∂A = 2A
∑
i
( ∑
k
pikxikx
⊤
ik −
∑
j∈Ci
pijxijx⊤
ij∑
j∈Ci
pij
)
(7)
We have experimented with optimizing this cost function as well, and found both the trans-
formations learned and the performance results on training and testing data to be very
similar to those obtained with the original cost function.
To speed up the gradient computation, the sums that appear in equations (5) and (7) over
the data points and over the neigbours of each point, can be truncated (one because we
can do stochastic gradient rather than exact gradient and the other because pij drops off
quickly).
3 Low Rank Distance Metrics and Nonsquare Projection
Often it is useful to reduce the dimensionality of input data, either for computational sav-
ings or for regularization of a subsequent learning algorithm. Linear dimensionality re-
duction techniques (which apply a linear operator to the original data in order to arrive
at the reduced representation) are popular because they are both fast and themselves rela-
tively immune to overﬁtting. Because they implement only afﬁne maps, linear projections
also preserve some essential topology of the original data. Many approaches exist for lin-
ear dimensionality reduction, ranging from purely unsupervised approaches (such as factor
analysis, principal components analysis and independent components analysis) to methods
which make use of class labels in addition to input features such as linear discriminant
analysis (LDA)[3] possibly combined with relevant components analysis (RCA)[1].
By restricting A to be a nonsquare matrix of sized×D, NCA can also do linear dimension-
ality reduction. In this case, the learned metric will be low rank, and the transformed inputs
will lie in Rd. (Since the transformation is linear, without loss of generality we only con-
sider the case d ≤ D. ) By making such a restriction, we can potentially reap many further
beneﬁts beyond the already convenient method for learning a KNN distance metric. In par-
ticular, by choosing d ≪ D we can vastly reduce the storage and search-time requirements
of KNN. Selecting d = 2 or d = 3 we can also compute useful low dimensional visual-
izations on labeled datasets, using only a linear projection. The algorithm is exactly the
same: optimize the cost function (3) using gradient descent on a nonsquare A. Our method
requires no matrix inversions and assumes no parametric model (Gaussian or otherwise)
for the class distributions or the boundaries between them. For now, the dimensionality of
the reduced representation (the number of rows in A) must be set by the user.
By using an highly rectangular A so that d ≪ D, we can signiﬁcantly reduce the com-
putational load of KNN at the expense of restricting the allowable metrics to be those of