Dataset
ogbl-ddi
(
Leaderboard
):
Graph:
The
ogbl-ddi
dataset is a homogeneous, unweighted, undirected graph, representing the drug-drug interaction network [1]. Each node represents an FDA-approved or experimental drug. Edges represent interactions between drugs and can be interpreted as a phenomenon where the joint effect of taking the two drugs together is considerably different from the expected effect in which drugs act independently of each other.
Prediction task:
The task is to predict drug-drug interactions given information on already known drug-drug interactions. The evaluation metric is similar to
ogbl-collab
, where we would like the model to rank true drug interactions higher than non-interacting drug pairs. Specifically, we rank each true drug interaction among a set of approximately 100,000 randomly-sampled negative drug interactions, and count the ratio of positive edges that are ranked at K-place or above (Hits@K). We found K = 20 to be a good threshold in our preliminary experiments.
Dataset splitting:
We develop a
protein-target split
, meaning that we split drug edges according to what proteins those drugs target in the body. As a result, the test set consists of drugs that predominantly bind to different proteins from drugs in the train and validation sets. This means that drugs in the test set work differently in the body, and have a rather different biological mechanism of action than drugs in the train and validation sets. The protein-target split thus enables us to evaluate to what extent the models can generate practically useful predictions [2], i.e., non-trivial predictions that are not hindered by the assumption that there exist already known and very similar medications available for training.
References
[1] David S Wishart, Yannick D Feunang, An C Guo, Elvis J Lo, Ana Marcu, Jason R Grant, TanvirSajed, Daniel Johnson, Carin Li, Zinat Sayeeda, et al.  DrugBank 5.0:  a major update to theDrugBank database for 2018. Nucleic Acids Research, 46(D1):D1074–D1082, 2018.
[2] Emre Guney. Reproducible drug repurposing: When similarity does not suffice. In Pacific Symposiumon Biocomputing, pp. 132–143, 2017.
License: CC-0
