for EKFAC is similarly costly and must be similarly amortized. But re-estimating the diagonal
scalings∗ in that basis is cheap, doable with every mini-batch, so we can hope to reactively track and
leverage the changes in 2nd order information along these directions. Figure 3 (right) provides an
empirical conﬁrmation that trackings∗ indeed allows to keep the approximation error ofGEKF AC
small, compared toGKF AC, between recomputations of basis or inverse .
Parameter space
 KFE basis
0 100 200 300
iterations
50%
100%
150%
200%
approximation error
KFAC
EKFAC
Figure 3: Left: Gradient correlation matrices measured in the initial parameter basis and in
the Kronecker-factored Eigenbasis (KFE), computed from a small 4 sigmoid layer MLP classiﬁer
trained on MNIST. Block corresponds to 250 parameters in the 2nd layer. Components are largely
decorrelated in the KFE, justifying the use of a diagonal rescaling method in that basis.
Right: Approximation error∥G− ˆG∥F
∥G∥F
where ˆG is eitherGKF ACorGEKF AC, for the small MNIST
classiﬁer. KFE basis and KFAC inverse are recomputed every 100 iterations. EKFAC’s cheap tracking
ofs∗ allows it to drift far less quickly than amortized KFAC from the exact empirical Fisher.
Dual view by working in the KFE: Instead of thinking of this new method as an improved
factorized approximation ofG that we use as a preconditioning matrix, we can alternatively view it
as applying a diagonal method, but in a different basis where the diagonal approximation is more
accurate (an assumption we empirically conﬁrm in Figure 3 left). This can be seen by interpreting
the update given by EKFAC as a 3 step process: project the gradient in the KFE (–), apply diagonal
natural gradient descent in this basis (–), then project back to the parameter space (–):
G−1
EKFAC∇θ = (UA ⊗UB)S∗−1 (UA ⊗UB)⊤∇θ
Note that by writing ˜∇θ = (UA ⊗UB)⊤ ∇θ the projected gradient in KFE, the computation of the
coefﬁcientss∗
i simpliﬁes ins∗
i = E[( ˜∇θ)2
i ]. Figure 3 shows gradient correlation matrices in both
the initial parameter basis and in the KFE. Gradient components appear far less correlated when
expressed in the KFE, which justiﬁes using a diagonal rescaling methodin that basis.
This viewpoint brings us close to network reparametrization approaches such as Fujimoto & Ohira
(2018), whose proposal – that was already hinted towards by Desjardins et al. (2015) – amounts to a
reparametrization equivalent of KFAC. More precisely, while Desjardins et al. (2015) empirically
explored a reparametrization that uses only input covarianceA (and thus corresponds only to "half
of" KFAC), Fujimoto & Ohira (2018) extend this to use also backpropagated gradient covariance
B, making it essentially equivalent to KFAC (with a few extra twists). Our approach differs in
that moving to the KFE corresponds to a change of orthonormal basis, and more importantly that
we cheaply track and perform a more optimal full diagonal rescaling in that basis, rather than the
constrained factoredSA ⊗SB diagonal that these other approaches are implicitly using.
Algorithm: Using Eigenvalue-corrected Kronecker factorization (EKFAC) for neural network
optimization involves: a) periodically (every n mini-batches) computing the Kronecker-factored
Eigenbasis by doing an eigendecomposition of the sameA andB matrices as KFAC; b) estimating
scaling vectors∗ as second moments of gradient coordinates in that implied basis; c) preconditioning
gradients accordingly prior to updating model parameters. Algorithm 1 provides a high level pseudo-
code of EKFAC for the case of fully-connected layers4, and when using it to approximate the empirical
Fisher. In this version, we re-estimates∗ from scratch on each mini-batch. An alternative (EKFAC-ra)
4EKFAC for convolutional layers follows the same structure, but require a more convoluted notation.
5