2011), Adadelta (Zeiler, 2012), RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015).
We refer the reader to Bottou et al. (2016) for an informative review of optimization methods for deep
networks, including diagonal rescalings, and connections with the Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015) technique.
More elaborate algorithms do not restrict to diagonal approximations, but instead aim at accounting
for some correlations between different parameters (as encoded by non-diagonal elements of the
preconditioning matrix). These methods range from Ollivier (2015) who introduces a rank 1 update
that accounts for the cross correlations between the biases and the weight matrices, to quasi Newton
methods (Liu & Nocedal, 1989) that build a running estimate of the exact non-diagonal precondi-
tioning matrix, and also include block diagonals approaches with blocks corresponding to entire
layers (Heskes, 2000; Desjardins et al., 2015; Martens & Grosse, 2015; Fujimoto & Ohira, 2018).
Factored approximations such as KFAC (Martens & Grosse, 2015; Ba et al., 2017) approximate each
block as a Kronecker product of two much smaller matrices, both of which can be estimated and
inverted more efﬁciently than the full block matrix, since the inverse of a Kronecker product of two
matrices is the Kronecker product of their inverses.
In the present work, we draw inspiration from both diagonal and factored approximations. We
introduce an Eigenvalue-corrected Kronecker Factorization (EKFAC) that consists in tracking a
diagonal variance, not in parameter coordinates, but in a Kronecker-factored eigenbasis (KFE). We
show that EKFAC is a provably better approximation of the Fisher Information Matrix than KFAC.
In addition, while computing the Kronecker-factored eigenbasis is a computationally expensive
operation that needs to be amortized, tracking of the diagonal variance is a cheap operation. EKFAC
therefore allows to perform partial updates of our curvature estimate G at the iteration level. We
conduct an empirical evaluation of EKFAC on the deep auto-encoder optimization task using fully-
connected networks and CIFAR-10 relying on deep convolutional neural networks where EKFAC
shows improvements over KFAC in optimization.
2 Background and notations
We are given a dataset Dtrain containing (input, target) examples (x,y ), and a neural network
fθ(x) with parameter vector θ of size nθ. We want to ﬁnd a value of θ that minimizes an
empirical risk R(θ) expressed as an average of a loss ℓ incurred by fθ over the training set:
R(θ) = E(x,y)∈Dtrain [ℓ(fθ(x),y )]. We will use E to denote both expectations w.r.t. a distribu-
tion or, as here, averages over ﬁnite sets, as made clear by the subscript and context. Considered
algorithms for optimizing R(θ) use stochastic gradients ∇θ = ∇θ(x,y ) = ∂ℓ(fθ(x),y)
∂θ , or their
average over a mini-batch of examples Dmini sampled from Dtrain. Stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) does a 1st order update:θ ←θ −η∇θ whereη is a positive learning rate. 2nd order methods
ﬁrst multiply∇θ by a preconditioning matrixG−1 yielding the update:θ ←θ −ηG−1∇θ. Precon-
ditioning matrices for Natural Gradient (Amari, 1998) / Generalized Gauss-Newton (Schraudolph,
2001) / TONGA (Le Roux et al., 2008) can all be expressed as either (centered) covariance or (un-
centered) second moment of ∇θ, computed over slightly different distributions of (x,y ). The natural
gradient uses the Fisher Information Matrix, which for a probabilistic classiﬁer can be expressed
asG = Ex∈Dtrain,y∼pθ(y|x)
[
∇θ∇⊤
θ
]
where the expectation is taken over targets sampled form the
modelpθ = fθ. By contrast, the empirical Fisher approximation or generalized Gauss-Newton
usesG = E(x,y)∈Dtrain
[
∇θ∇⊤
θ
]
. Our discussion and development applies regardless of the precise
distribution over (x,y ) used to estimate aG so we will from here on use E without a subscript.
MatrixG has a gigantic sizenθ ×nθ, which makes it too big to compute and invert. In order to get
a practical algorithm, we must ﬁnd approximations ofG that keep some of the relevant 2nd order
information while removing the unnecessary and computationally costly parts. A ﬁrst simpliﬁcation,
adopted by nearly all prior approaches, consists in treating each layer of the neural network separately,
ignoring cross-layer terms. This amounts to a ﬁrst block-diagonal approximation ofG: each block
G(l) caters for the parameters of a single layerl. NowG(l) can typically still be extremely large.
A cheap but very crude approximation consists in using a diagonal G(l), i.e. taking into account
the variance in each parameter dimension, but ignoring all covariance structure. A less stringent
approximation was proposed by Heskes (2000) and later Martens & Grosse (2015). They propose
to approximateG(l) as a Kronecker product G(l) ≈ A ⊗B which involves two smaller matrices,
2