positive semi-deﬁnite matrices can be expressed using their own eigendecompositionA =UASAU⊤
A
andB =UBSBU⊤
B , yieldingA ⊗B = (UASAU⊤
A ) ⊗ (UBSBU⊤
B ) = (UA ⊗UB)(SA ⊗SB)(UA ⊗
UB)⊤.UA ⊗UB gives the orthogonal eigenbasis of the Kronecker product, we call it the Kronecker-
Factored Eigenbasis (KFE).SA ⊗SB is the diagonal matrix containing the associated eigenvalues.
Note that each such eigenvalue will be a product of an eigenvalue ofA stored inSA and an eigenvalue
ofB stored inSB. We can view the action of the resulting Kronecker-factored preconditioning in the
same way as we viewed the preconditioning by the full matrix: it consists in a) expressing gradient
vector ∇θ in a different basisUA ⊗UB which can be thought of as approximating the directions of
U, b) doing a diagonal rescaling bySA ⊗SB in that basis, c) switching back to the initial parameter
space. Here however the rescaling factor (SA ⊗SB)ii is not guaranteed to match the second moment
along the associated eigenvector E[((UA ⊗UB)⊤∇θ)2
i ].
In summary (see Figure 2):
• Full matrix G preconditioning will scale by variances estimated along the eigenbasis ofG.
• Diagonal preconditioning will scale by variances properly estimated, but along the initial
parameter basis, which can be very far from the eigenbasis ofG.
• KFAC preconditioning will scale the gradient along the KFE basis that will likely be closer
to the eigenbasis ofG, but doesn’t use properly estimated variances along these axes for this
scaling (the scales being themselves constrained to being a Kronecker productSA ⊗SB).
- Fisher 
- Diagonal 
- K-FAC 
- EKFAC
Eigenspectrum of 
approximations
Rescaling of the gradient is done along a speciﬁc basis; length of vectors
indicate (square root of) amount of downscaling. Exact Fisher Information
Matrix rescales according to eigenvectors/values of exact covariance struc-
ture (green ellipse). Diagonal approximation uses parameter coordinate
basis, scaling by actual variance measured along these axes (indicated by
horizontal and vertical orange arrows touching exactly the ellipse), KFAC
uses directions that approximate Fisher Information Matrix eigenvectors,
but uses approximate scaling (blue arrows not touching the ellipse). EK-
FAC corrects this.
Figure 2: Cartoon illustration of rescaling achieved by different preconditioning strategies
3.2 Eigenvalue-corrected Kronecker Factorization (EKFAC)
To correct for the potentially inexact rescaling of KFAC, and obtain a better but still computationally
efﬁcient approximation, instead ofGKF AC=A⊗B = (UA⊗UB)(SA⊗SB)(UA⊗UB)⊤ we propose
to use an Eigenvalue-corrected Kronecker Factorization: GEKFAC = (UA ⊗UB)S∗(UA ⊗UB)⊤
whereS∗ is the diagonal matrix deﬁned by S∗
ii = s∗
i = E[((UA ⊗UB)⊤∇θ)2
i ]. Vector s∗ is the
vector of second moments of the gradient vector coordinates expressed in the Kronecker-factored
Eigenbasis (KFE)UA ⊗UB and can be efﬁciently estimated and stored.
In Appendix A.1 we prove that thisS∗ is the optimal diagonal rescaling in that basis, in the sense that
S∗ = arg minS ∥G − (UA ⊗UB)S(UA ⊗UB)⊤∥F s.t.S is diagonal: it minimizes the approximation
error to G as measured by Frobenius norm (denoted ∥ · ∥F ), which KFAC’s correspondingS =
SA ⊗SB cannot generally achieve. A corollary of this is that we will always have∥G−GEKF AC∥F ≤
∥G −GKF AC∥F i.e. EKFAC yields a better approximation ofG than KFAC (Theorem 2 proven in
Appendix). Figure 2 illustrates the different rescaling strategies, including EKFAC.
Potential beneﬁts: Since EKFAC is a better approximation ofG than KFAC (in the limited sense
of Frobenius norm of the residual) it may yield a better preconditioning of the gradient for optimizing
neural networks3. Another beneﬁt is linked to computational efﬁciency: even if KFAC yields a
reasonably good approximation in practice, it is costly to re-estimate and invert matricesA andB, so
this has to be amortized over many updates: re-estimation of the preconditioning is thus typically
done at a much lower frequency than the parameter updates, and may lag behind, no longer accurately
reﬂecting the local 2nd order information. Re-estimating the Kronecker-factored Eigenbasis (KFE)
3Although there is no guarantee. In particular GEKF ACbeing a better approximation of G does not guarantee
that G−1
EKF AC∇θ will be closer to the natural gradient update direction G−1∇θ .
4