5 Experiments
We have evaluated our proposed methods as well as KFAC, SGD and ADAM on the three standard deep-auto-encoder
problems used for benchmarking neural network optimization methods (Botev et al., 2017; Martens, 2010; Martens &
Grosse, 2015; Sutskever et al., 2013). The benchmarks consist of training three different auto-encoder architectures
with CURVES, MNIST and FACE datasets respectively. See appendix D for a complete description of the network
architectures and datasets. In our experiments, all our proposed methods as well as KFAC use approximations of the
exact FIMF . Experiments were performed with PyTorch framework (Paszke et al., 2019) on supercomputer with
Nividia Ampere A100 GPU and AMD Milan@2.45GHz CPU.
The precision valueϵ for power SVD and Lanczos bi-diagonalization algorithm was set to 10−6. Also for these two
algorithms, we used a warm-start technique which means that the ﬁnal results of the previous iteration are used as a
starting point (instead of a random point) for the current iteration. This has resulted in a faster convergence. In all
experiments, the batch sizes used are 256, 512 and 1024 for CURVES, MNIST and FACES datasets respectively.
We ﬁrst evaluate the approximation qualities of the FIM and then report the results on performance of the optimization
objective.
5.1 Approximation qualities of the FIM
We investigated how well our proposed methods and KFAC approximate blocks of the exact FIM. To do so, we computed
for each of the problems the exact FIM and its different approximations of the 5th layer of the network. For a fair
comparison, the exact FIM as well as its different approximations were computed during the same optimization process
with an independent optimizer (SGD or ADAM). We ran two independent tests with SGD and ADAM optimizers
respectively and ended up with the same results. We therefore decided to report only the results obtained with ADAM.
LetF be the exact FIM of the 5th layer of the network and ˆF be any approximation toF ( ˆF is in the formA⊗B for
KFAC and KPSVD, andR⊗S +P⊗Q for KFAC corrected, Deﬂation and Lanczos). We measured the following two
types of error:
• Error 1: Frobenius norm error betweenF and ˆF :∥F− ˆF∥F/∥F∥F ;
• Error 2:ℓ2 norm error between the spectra ofF and ˆF :∥spec(F )− spec( ˆF )∥2/∥spec(F )∥2 where spec(M)
denotes the spectrum ofM and∥·∥ 2 is theℓ2 norm.
Note that here the Fisher matrices were estimated without the exponentially decaying averaging scheme which means
that only the mini-batch at iterationk is used to compute the Fisher matrices at this iteration.
As we can see in Figure 1, for each of the problems, the Deﬂation method gives the best approximation, followed by the
other methods. Although Deﬂation and Lanczos bi-diagonalization may appear as two implementations of the same
idea (i.e., computing the two largest singular vectors), the former turns out to be more robust than the latter, in the sense
that it converges much faster to the two dominant pairs and also produces a much smaller error. This accounts for the
difference in performance between the two methods. The Error 1 and Error 2 made by our different methods remain
lower than those caused by KFAC throughout the optimization process. This suggests that our methods give a better
approximation to the Fisher than KFAC, and that increasing the rank does improve the quality of approximation. One
can go further in this direction if there is no prohibitive extra cost.
5.2 Optimization performance
We now consider the network optimization in each of the three problems. We have evaluated our methods against
KFAC and the baselines (SGD and ADAM). Here the different approximations to the FIM were computed using the
exponentially decaying technique as described in §2.2. The decay factorα was set to0.95 as in (Martens & Grosse, 2015).
Since the goal of KFAC as well as our methods is optimization performance rather than generalization, we performed
Grid Search for each method and selected hyperparameters that gave a better reduction to the training loss. The learning
rateη and the damping parameterλ are in range{10−1, 10−2, 10−3, 10−4, 3· 10−1, 3· 10−2, 3· 10−3, 3· 10−4}, and
the clipping parameterc belongs to{10−2, 10−3} (see appendix E for deﬁnition ofc). Note that damping and clipping
are used only in KFAC and our proposed methods. Update frequencies T1 andT2 were set to 100. The momentum
parameters wereβ = 0.9 for SGD and (β1,β 2) = (0.9, 0.999) for ADAM.
Figure 2 shows the performance of the different optimizers on the three studied problems. The ﬁrst observation is that
in each problem, KFAC as well as our methods optimize the training loss function faster than SGD and ADAM both
with respect to epoch and time. Although our methods may seem much more computationally expensive than KFAC
since at each iteration we perform the power SVD or Lanczos bi-diagonalization to estimate the Fisher matrix, they
8