In classical optimization, second-order methods are known for their efﬁciency in terms of convergence speed compared
to ﬁrst-order methods. A second-order iteration reads
θk+1 =θk−αk[H(θk)]−1∇θh(θk),
whereH(θk)∈ Rp×p is the curvature matrix of h atθk. The matrix H can be the Hessian matrix∇2
θθh as in the
Newton-Raphson method, the drawback of which is that−H−1∇θh is not guaranteed to be a descent direction (Nocedal
& Wright, 2006). It is wiser to replace the Hessian matrix by a surrogate such as the Generalized Gauss-Newton matrix
(Schraudolph, 2002) or the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) (Amari, 1998), which are always positive semi-deﬁnite.
Unfortunately, second-order methods remain impractical for deep neural networks where the number of parameters can
quickly become very large (tens of millions), making it impossible to compute and to store, let alone to invertH.
A ﬁrst way to avoid assembling and storing the matrixH is the inexact resolution of the linear system by Conjugate
Gradient (CG), which requires only matrix-vector products. This Hessian-free philosophy (Martens, 2010) is still
expensive, since the CG must be run with a signiﬁcant number of iterations before reaching an acceptable convergence.
An alternative is to consider the direct inversion of a diagonal approximation toH, as in (Becker & Le Cun, 1988) for
the Hessian matrix or in (Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma & Ba, 2015; Tieleman & Hinton, 2012) for the empirical FIM. The
reader is referred to (Kunstner et al., 2019; Martens, 2014) for the difference between the empirical and the exact FIM
(both are estimators of the true FIM but the second one uses sampled outputs from the model distribution). Another
approach is to use a low-rank approximation of the Hessian matrix such as BFGS (Broyden, 1970; Fletcher, 1970;
Goldfarb, 1970; Shanno, 1970) or its low-memory version L-BFGS (Liu & Nocedal, 1989), which is better suited to
deep learning. Nevertheless, the trouble with diagonal and low-rank approximations is that they are very rough and
therefore give rise to less efﬁcient algorithms than a well-tuned SGD.
More advanced methods resort to a block-diagonal approximation of a curvature matrix. Le Roux et al. (2008) and
Ollivier (2015) use respectively a block-diagonal approximation of the empirical and exact FIM where each block
contains the weights associated to a particular neuron. Based on early ideas in (Heskes, 2000; Pascanu & Bengio, 2013;
Povey et al., 2014), a new family of methods under the name of KFAC have recently emerged (Ba et al., 2017; George
et al., 2018; Grosse & Martens, 2016; Martens & Grosse, 2015; Martens et al., 2018). Thanks to a Kronecker-factored
layer-wise block-diagonal approximation of the FIM, the KFAC methods have proven to be more powerful than a
well-tuned SGD. Following similar lines of thought, Botev et al. (2017) and Goldfarb et al. (2020) also proposed
efﬁcient approximations of respectively GGN and Hessian matrices for training Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP).
The fundamental assumption on which KFAC hinges is the independence between activations and pre-activation
derivatives. We believe that this premise, the theoretical foundation of which is unclear, is at the root of a poor quality
of the FIM approximation. This is why, in this work, we wish to put forward four Kronecker-factored block-diagonal
approximations that aim at more accurately representing the FIM by removing this assumption. To this end, we minimize
the Frobenius norm of the difference between the original matrix and a prescribed form for the approximation, which is
achievable through the Kronecker product singular value decomposition. Tests carried out on the three standard deep
auto-encoder benchmarks showed that our proposed methods outperform KFAC both in terms of FIM approximation
quality and optimization speed of the objective function.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the natural gradient and KFAC methods. Section 3 proposes the
above mentioned novel approximations. In Section 4, we present and comment several numerical experiments. Finally,
the conclusion overviews the work undertaken in this research and outlines directions for future study.
2 Background and notation
The notations used in this paper are fairly similar to those introduced in (Martens & Grosse, 2015). We consider an
ℓ-layer feedforward neural networkfθ parametrized by
θ = [vec(W1)T, vec(W2)T,..., vec(Wℓ)T ]T∈ Rp,
whereWi∈ Rdi×(di−1+1) is the weights matrix associated to layeri and “vec” is the operator that vectorizes a matrix
by stacking its columns together. This network transforms an input x =: a0∈ Rd0 to an output z = fθ(x) by the
sequence
si =Wi¯ai−1, a i =σi(si), fori from 1 toℓ,
terminated byz :=aℓ∈ Rdℓ. Here, ¯ai−1 = (1,aT
i )T is the augmented activation vector (value 1 is used for the bias)
andσi the activation function at layeri. The number of neurons at layeri isdi and the total number of parameters is
p =∑ℓ
i=1di(di−1 + 1).
2