EFFICIENT APPROXIMATIONS OF THE FISHER MATRIX IN
NEURAL NETWORKS USING KRONECKER PRODUCT SINGULAR
VALUE DECOMPOSITION
Abdoulaye Koroko1,2,*, Ani Anciaux-Sedrakian1, Ibtihel Ben Gharbia1, Valérie Garès3, Mounir Haddou3, and Quang
Huy Tran1
1IFP Energies nouvelles, 1 et 4 avenue de Bois Préau, 92852 Rueil-Malmaison Cedex, France
2CentraleSupélec – Université Paris-Saclay, 3 Rue Joliot Curie, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
3Univ Rennes, INSA, CNRS, IRMAR - UMR 6625, F-35000 Rennes, France
*Corresponding author: abdoulaye.koroko@ifpen.fr
ABSTRACT
Several studies have shown the ability of natural gradient descent to minimize the objective function
more efﬁciently than ordinary gradient descent based methods. However, the bottleneck of this
approach for training deep neural networks lies in the prohibitive cost of solving a large dense linear
system corresponding to the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) at each iteration. This has motivated
various approximations of either the exact FIM or the empirical one. The most sophisticated of these
is KFAC, which involves a Kronecker-factored block diagonal approximation of the FIM. With only
a slight additional cost, a few improvements of KFAC from the standpoint of accuracy are proposed.
The common feature of the four novel methods is that they rely on a direct minimization problem,
the solution of which can be computed via the Kronecker product singular value decomposition
technique. Experimental results on the three standard deep auto-encoder benchmarks showed that
they provide more accurate approximations to the FIM. Furthermore, they outperform KFAC and
state-of-the-art ﬁrst-order methods in terms of optimization speed.
1 Introduction
In Deep Learning, the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) method (Robbins & Monro, 1951) and its variants are
currently the prevailing methods for training neural networks. To solve the problem
argmin
θ∈Rp
h(θ) := 1
n
n∑
t=1
L(yt,fθ(xt)),
whereh denotes the empirical risk associated with the training dataT ={(x1,y 1), (x2,y 2),... (xn,yn)} and the loss
functionL, the batch SGD method produces iterates
θk+1 =θk−αk∇θh(Sk,θk),
whereαk > 0 stands for the learning rate and where
∇θh(Sk,θk) = 1
|Sk|
∑
(xt,yt)∈Sk
∇θL(yt,fθk(xt))
is a batch approximation of the full gradient∇θh(θk) = 1
n
∑n
t=1∇θL(yt,fθk(xt)) on a random subsetSk⊂T .
Despite its ease of implementation and great popularity in the machine learning community, the SGD method, like all
other ﬁrst-order methods, is known to have limited effectiveness (requires many iterations in order to converge or even
simply diverges) for non-convex objective functions, as is the case in deep neural networks.
arXiv:2201.10285v6  [cs.NE]  14 Oct 2022