(a) CURVES
 (b) MNIST
 (c) FACES
Figure 1: Comparison between FIM approximation qualities of our methods and KFAC. For each problem, at each
training iteration of the network with ADAM optimizer, the exact FIM and its different approximations are computed
for layer 5 of the network. Error 1 and Error 2 described in subsection 5.1 are measured. For the sake of visual
comparison between different methods, the display scale in the axis of ordinates was deliberately restricted to [0, 1] for
the MNIST problem. It thus seems that the error curves for KFAC, whose peak amplitudes are about 6.5, are truncated.
actually have the same order of magnitude in computational cost as KFAC. See appendix C for a comparison of the
computational costs. For each of the three problems, we observe that KFAC and KPSVD perform about the same while
the DEFLATION, LANCZOS and KFAC-CORRECTED methods have the ability to optimize the objective function
much faster both with respect to epoch and time.
Although this is not our object of study, we observe that for each of the three problems, our proposed methods also
maintain a good generalization.
6 Conclusion and perspectives
In this work, we proposed a series of novel Kronecker factorizations to the blocks of the Fisher of multi-layer perceptrons
using the Kronecker product Singular Value Decomposition technique. Tests realized on the three standard deep auto-
encoder problems showed that 3 out of 4 of our proposed methods (DEFLATION, LANCZOS, KFAC-CORRECT)
outperform KFAC both in terms of Fisher approximation quality and in terms of optimization speed of the objective
function. This ranking, which goes from the most efﬁcient one to the least efﬁcient one, testiﬁes to the fact that
higher-rank approximations yield better results than lower-rank ones.
KFAC as well as our methods use a block-diagonal approximation of FIM where each block corresponds to a layer. This
results in ignoring the correlations between the layers. Future works will focus on incorporating cross-layer information,
as was attempted by Tselepidis et al. (2020) with a two-level KFAC preconditioning approach.
9