The elements of the output tensor of the convolution are then defined as
oI
d,i,j =
CinX
c=1
KX
k=1
KX
k′=1
X I
c,i+k−1,j+k′−1Wd,c,k,k′; (3)
the input elements Xc,i+k−1,j+k′−1 are defined as 0 outside of the image’s boundaries. Now, we can
unfold the input tensor to a matrix X ∈ RHW ×CinK2
, where we have extracted and vectorised the
K×K sized patches for each of the H ·W spatial locations. The weight tensor can be reshaped to the
matrix W ∈ RCout×CinK2
. Using these quantities, we can write the convolution as O = XW ⊺ ∈
RHW ×Cout. Again, we can recognise the canonical form of a linear weight-sharing layer – here, with
R = HW , i.e. the weights are shared across all spatial locations.
Example 3: Graph neural network layer. We follow Battaglia et al. (2018) since their formulation
encompasses many graph neural network (GNN) layers. For the full example and notation, please
refer to Appendix A. Once again, the core operations in these kinds of models can be expressed as
linear weight-sharing layers. Here, the weights are shared across all R = NV nodes or R = NE
edges of a graph, depending on whether node or edge features are being updated.
2.3 The generalised Gauss–Newton and the Fisher matrix
To avoid computing the Hessian, approximations like the generalised Gauss–Newton matrix (GGN)
are usually used in deep learning (Botev et al., 2017; Martens, 2010; Schraudolph, 2002). Defining
Λ(fθ(xn)) :=∇2
fθ ℓ(yn, fθ(xn)) ∈ RC×C, we have
GGN(θ) =
NX
n=1
Jθfθ(xn)⊺Λ(fθ(xn))Jθfθ(xn), (4)
which is equivalent to the Hessian whenfθ is a linear model or the residualg−1(fθ(xn)) − yn is zero
for all data points, where g−1 is the inverse link function, e.g. the softmax function for classification.
For all likelihoods of the exponential family with natural parameterisation the GGN coincides with
the Fisher information matrix (Martens, 2014; Wang, 2010). This is, for example, the case for the
common cross-entropy loss corresponding to a categorical likelihood and the mean-square error loss
corresponding to a Gaussian likelihood. Setting Ct in Equation (1) to the Fisher leads to natural
gradient descent (Amari, 1998). We will only state our derivations for the GGN explicitly, but they
follow analogously for the Fisher.
2.4 Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature
The GGN is a semi-p.d. approximation to the Hessian, of size P ×P , which is still prohibitively large
for DNNs. K-FAC was proposed as an efficient approximation to a neural network’s Fisher (Heskes,
2000; Martens & Grosse, 2015) and GGN (Botev et al., 2017) matrix.2 First, we only approximate the
GGN for each layer, ignoring cross-layer interactions, which results in a block-diagonal matrix. We
define Jθℓ (xn) :=Jθℓ fθ(xn) =Jsℓ,n fθ(xn)Jθℓ sℓ,n ∈ RC×Pℓ as the Jacobian of the model outputs
w.r.t. the parameters of the ℓ-th layer. Now we can write sℓ,n = Wℓaℓ,n = (a⊺
ℓ,n ⊗ IPℓ,out ) vec(Wℓ)
and with this we have Jθℓ sℓ,n = a⊺
ℓ,n ⊗ IPℓ,out . Additionally, by defining bℓ,n := Jsℓ,n fθ(xn)⊺ ∈
RPℓ,out×C as the transposed Jacobian of the model outputs w.r.t. the pre-activations of theℓ-th layer,
we note that Jθℓ (xn)⊺ = (a⊺
ℓ,n ⊗ IPℓ,out )⊺bℓ,n = aℓ,n ⊗ bℓ,n. K-FAC approximates the GGN of the
ℓ-th layer as
GGN(θℓ) ≈
"
1
N
NX
n=1
aℓ,na⊺
ℓ,n
#
| {z }
=:Aℓ
⊗
" NX
n=1
bℓ,nΛ(fθ(xn))b⊺
ℓ,n
#
| {z }
=:Bℓ
, (5)
where we have replaced the (transposed) Jacobians in the definition of the GGN in Equation (4) by
aℓ,n ⊗ bℓ,n and approximated the sum of Kronecker products with a Kronecker product of sums.3
2In the literature, the name “K-FAC” is used to refer to the approximation of the Fisher/GNN and to a specific
algorithm using this approximation (Martens & Grosse, 2015); here, we use it to refer to just the approximation.
3Note that the Kronecker product A ⊗ B is in reverse order compared to in Figure 1, because we concatenate
the columns in the derivation and the rows in the implementation when flattening a matrix with vec(·).
4