where Jsℓ,n,r fθ(Xn)m are the same Jacobians we have derived for the expand case. Since according
to Lemma 5 we need all bℓ,n,r to be the same for all r ∈ {1, . . . , R} for the first approximation to be
exact under the assumptions of Proposition 6, K-FAC-reduce is only exact when N = 1 and only for
the layer with weights W Q – just as K-FAC-expand in the expand setting.
When we extend this scenario to a network consisting of L blocks as defined in Equation (45), the
above statements regarding the special case where K-FAC-expand and K-FAC-reduce are exact for the
layer with weights W Q only hold for the last block. While we omit an explicit derivation, intuitively,
this can be seen by the fact that we cannot rewrite the r-th row of this model’s output as a function of
only the r-th row of the layer’s outputSℓ,Q,n of all layers with weights W Q
ℓ , besides for the layer in
the last block, i.e. the layer in the L-th block with weights W Q
L .
This shows that even without explicit nonlinear activation functions, the self-attention mechanism in
transformer models breaks the two approximations. Hence, it is not inherently clear how useful it
is to consider the corresponding approximation in the expand and reduce setting. This is especially
relevant given that we know that the computational complexity of K-FAC-reduce is generally smaller
than of K-FAC-expand and given the similar downstream optimisation performance we report in
Section 4.
B.3.2 K-FAC for GNNs
Beyond transformers, we have introduced GNNs as a class of models that also use linear weight-
sharing layers. There are many types of GNNs and we will only explicitly cover two of them
here.
Related work: node classification with GCN. We first consider a GCN layer, described in Ap-
pendix A. This specification of K-FAC for GNNs has been previously derived for semi-supervised
node classification in Izadi et al. (2020) and we include it for completeness, since it is, to the best of
our knowledge, the only case where K-FAC has been applied to a GNN. The only difference to the
normal derivation of K-FAC is that the inputs˜aℓ,n to the ℓ-th layer for the node with index n now
depend on its neighbourhood N (n), since
˜aℓ,n :=
X
j∈N (n)
ˆC njaℓ,j ∈ RPℓ,in . (51)
Using this notation, the definition of the K-FAC GGN for node classification is simply
GGN (θℓ) =
NX
n=1
Jθℓ (X)⊺
nΛ(fθ(X)n)Jθℓ (X)n
≈
 1
N
NX
n=1
˜aℓ,n˜a
⊺
ℓ,n

| {z }
=: ˜Aℓ
⊗
 NX
n=1
˜bℓ,nΛ(fθ(X)n)˜b
⊺
ℓ,n

| {z }
=: ˜Bℓ
,
(52)
where X ∈ RN ×D, ˜bℓ,n := J˜sℓ,n fθℓ (X)⊺
n, and ˜sℓ,n := Wℓ˜aℓ,n. Again, it is important to note
that we need to have access to the whole neighbourhood of xn to be able to write the n-th term of
the GGN, which is why the input to the model is the matrix X containing all nodes for each loss
term. Also, depending on the sparsity of ˆC, i.e. the size of neighbourhoods, we might have multiple
identical terms. In the extreme case of all neighbourhoods being the same, e.g. in the case of a fully
connected graph, i.e. are values of ˆC are the same, all terms of the GGN will be the same.
According to the first of the three cases in Section 3.1, we do not need to think in terms of the expand
and reduce settings here – as opposed to the case of the GraphNetwork we consider next, because we
aggregate over each node’s neighbourhoodbefore the forward pass through a linear layer.
Graph classification with GraphNetwork. Now, we want to look at a more general architecture, an
instance of the GraphNetwork introduced in Battaglia et al. (2018) and described in Appendix A. It is
important to note that while the inputs and the GraphNetwork block structure look different from
our standard input and linear layer, this case can be treated the same. This architecture is therefore a
good didactic example of how to apply the presented framework of thinking about K-FAC for linear
weight-sharing layers to new model architectures. In contrast to the original description in Battaglia
26