Pℓ,in
N ·R
aℓ= in_data
K-F AC-expand
Pℓ,out
N ·R
bℓ= out_grads
Pℓ,in
Pℓ,in
A = a⊺
ℓaℓ/N
Pℓ,out
Pℓ,out
B = b⊺
ℓbℓ
Pℓ
Pℓ
ˆGGNθℓ = B ⊗A
Pℓ
Pℓ
|GGN(θℓ)− ˆGGNθℓ|
N
K-F AC-reduce
N
Pℓ,in
Pℓ,out
Pℓ
Pℓ
Figure 1: Visualisation of K-FAC-expand and K-FAC-reduce in the expand setting.The shown
quantities are for a single layer within a deep linear network. We have N = 4 , R = 2 , Pℓ,in =
8, Pℓ,out = 8, and Pℓ = Pℓ,in ·Pℓ,out = 64. As we have seen in Section 3.2, K-FAC-expand is exact for
the expand case in this setting and K-FAC-reduce is not. For better visibility, the color scale is not the
same for all quantities, except for the approximation error (right) where black represents zero.
3 K-FAC for linear weight-sharing layers
In this section, we propose to distinguish between two different linear weight-sharing settings when
applying K-FAC. The two settings motivate two corresponding approximations, K-FAC-expand
and K-FAC-reduce. However, both approximations can be applied in each setting , see Listing 1
for an illustration with code. More details on the derivations and the proofs for Proposition 1 and
Proposition 2 can be found in Appendix B.
3.1 The expand and reduce settings
Within a network, linear layers with weight-sharing can be classified based on the point where the
weight-sharing dimension is aggregated. Specifically, there are three possible aggregation points,
which will define the setting for the ℓ-th layer:
(i) Before the ℓ-th layer, i.e. Aℓ,n ∈ RR×Pℓ,in is reduced to ˜aℓ,n ∈ RPℓ,in before being multiplied
with the weight matrix of the layer Wℓ. → We are in the setting of a regular linear layer and
no additional considerations are necessary when using K-FAC.
(ii) After the per-example loss, i.e. there will be N ·R labels and outputs of the model. The
per-example loss is applied to each of the N ·R output-label pairs. → This is the expand
setting, as the loss for each of the N data points is expanded with R terms.
(iii) In between the pre-activation of the ℓ-th layer Sℓ,n ∈ RR×Pℓ,out and the model output
fθ(xn), i.e. before the final aggregation over the per-example losses. → This is the reduce
setting, as all weight-sharing dimensions have been reduced during the forward pass.
If we assume a single weight-sharing dimension which will be reduced once, the number of loss
terms determines which setting applies to all linear weight-sharing layers within the model. So for
our purposes, we can identify the setting we are in simply by looking at the form of the loss.
3.2 K-FAC-expand
The expand setting can be characterised by a loss with N ·R terms, similar to N ·R i.i.d. examples,
Lexpand(fθ, D) := −PN
n=1
PR
r=1 log p(yn,r|fθ(xn)r), where fθ(xn)r is the r-th row of the model
output fθ(xn) ∈ RR×C and yn,r is the r-th row of the label Yn ∈ RR×C. A typical example of this
type of loss function is language translation, where N is the dataset size and R is the sequence length.
We can express the Jacobian of the r-th row of the model output fθ(xn) ∈ RR×C w.r.t. θℓ as
Jθℓ (xn)r =PR
m=1 Jsℓ,n,m fθ(xn)rJθℓ sℓ,n,m. Since the weights θℓ are shared across the weight-
sharing dimension of size R, we can write the r-th row of Sℓ,n as sℓ,n,r = Wℓaℓ,n,r and we have
Jθℓ sℓ,n,r = a⊺
ℓ,n,r ⊗IPℓ,out, as for a regular linear layer. We denote bℓ,n,r,m := Jsℓ,n,m fθ(xn)⊺
r .
5