A Weight-sharing in graph neural networks
In this section, we expand on the third example in Section 2.2 on graph neural networks (GNNs) and
show how they use linear layers with weight-sharing.
Graph convolutional network for node classification. A popular type of GNN is called graph
convolutional network (Kipf & Welling, 2016, GCN). A GCN defines a convolution operation on
graph structures, by repeatedly aggregating feature information over the neighbourhood of a node.
As a regular convolutional neural network, it also uses weight-sharing; see Liu et al. (2020) for a
comprehensive discussion on weight-sharing in GCNs. However, in contrast to the other models
presented here, they utilise a slightly different type of weight-sharing, which will become apparent in
Equation (12). Nevertheless, we briefly mention this case here, since the only work on K-FAC for
GNNs has been on this model architecture and we will explicitly show how K-FAC was applied in
this case in Appendix B.3.2; this relies on the notation introduced here.
A graph is defined as G := (V, E), where V is the set of N nodes and E the set of edges. The edges
can be encoded relative to the nodes in an adjacency matrix C ∈ RN ×N with Cij = 0 if there is no
edge and Cij = 1 if there is one. Typically, they are used for node and graph classification tasks.
Here, we focus on node classification, e.g. classifying scientific publications which are represented as
nodes in a citation network into topics (Sen et al., 2008).
The ℓ-th GCN layer is defined as
fθℓ (X) = ϕ( ˆCXW ⊺
ℓ ) (11)
which is identical to a regular dense linear layer from Section 2.2, but the input matrixX ∈ RN ×Pℓ,in,
which has the N node features xn of size Pℓ,in stacked in the rows, is first transformed by the
normalised adjacency matrix ˆC := (D + IN )− 1
2 (C + IN )(D + IN )− 1
2 , where D is the diagonal
node degree matrix of the graph and IN is the N × N identity matrix.
Defining
˜xn :=
NX
j=1
ˆC njxj =
X
j∈N (n)
ˆC njxj, (12)
we can express the forward pass for a single node and layer as
fθℓ (˜xn) = ϕ(Wℓ˜xn), (13)
where N (n) := {j ∈ {1, . . . , N}| ˆC nj ̸= 0} is the neighbourhood of the node with indexn. Notably,
the forward pass for a single node xn depends on its neighbourhood, i.e. we cannot express the
forward pass for the node without access to the feature information of the nodes in its neighbourhood
N (n). Moreover, we can now see that the forward pass through the linear layer, i.e. the matrix
multiplication of the weight matrix Wℓ with the transformed input ˜xn, does not need the notion of
weight-sharing anymore, in the sense, that we do not need a batched matrix-vector product over a
weight-sharing dimension. This is because we aggregate over each node’s neighbourhood, over which
the weights are shared, before the matrix-vector product. Hence, in contrast to the GraphNetwork
introduced in the next paragraph, this model does not require special consideration when applying
K-FAC (c.f. setting (i) in Section 3.1).
GraphNetwork for graph classification. One more general formulation of a GNN is an instance
of the GraphNetwork introduced in Battaglia et al. (2018). The GraphNetwork in its general form
takes a graph G = ( u, V, E) where u ∈ RDu are the global features of the graph, and V and E
are the sets of nodes and edges, respectively, just as before. We can also write the i-th graph of a
dataset of N graphs as a 5-tuple XG
n := ( xu
n, X V
n , X E
n , rn, sn), with global features xu
n ∈ RDu,
node features X V
n ∈ RN V
n ×DV , and edge features X E
n ∈ RN E
n ×DE for all n = 1 , . . . , N. The
two vectors rn ∈ RN E
n and sn ∈ RN E
n contain the indices of the receiving and sending nodes of
each edge, respectively. Using these indices, we define X V
n,rn ∈ RN E
n ×DV and X V
n,sn ∈ RN E
n ×DV
which contain the node features X V
n at indices sn and rn, respectively. Note, that these graph inputs
unfortunately cannot trivially be batched by stacking them, since the number of nodes N V
n or edges
N E
n are not necessarily the same for all n ∈ {1, . . . , N}.
15