Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature (Heskes, 2000; Martens & Grosse, 2015, K-FAC) is
an approximation to the Fisher, or for common loss functions equivalently, the generalised Gauss-
Newton matrix (GGN). It has first been derived in the context of optimisation for linear layers and
later for convolutional (Grosse & Martens, 2016) and recurrent (Martens et al., 2018) layers. In
deep learning, using the Fisher/GGN instead of the Hessian has been the de-facto standard; in turn,
K-FAC has arguably been one of the most popular approximations of the Fisher/GGN, probably due
to its relative efficiency as it approximates each layer’s Fisher/GGN independently with a Kronecker
product. While K-FAC has also been used for transformers (Grosse et al., 2023; Osawa et al., 2022;
Pauloski et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2019a) and a graph neural network (Izadi et al., 2020), there is no
theoretical framework for these cases and for applying K-FAC to new architectures.
Contributions. We propose such a framework by leveraging the idea of linear layers with weight-
sharing. This concept reveals the additional structure in the Fisher/GGN due to the weight-sharing
that has to be explicitly considered when applying K-FAC. We identify two settings of such layers
that motivate two different flavours of the K-FAC approximation:K-FAC-expandand K-FAC-reduce.
The former corresponds to the Kronecker Factors for Convolution (KFC) approximation in Grosse
& Martens (2016), to the simplest approximation for recurrent layers proposed in Martens et al.
(2018), and has been used for transformers (Grosse et al., 2023; Osawa et al., 2022; Pauloski et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2019a) – though without discussion or motivation. Notably, K-FAC-reduce is
exact for certain settings, like deep linear networks with convolutions and average pooling, under the
same conditions that K-FAC is exact for deep linear networks without weight-sharing, whereas the
currently used K-FAC-expand is not. In practice, both approximations can be used in each setting and
K-FAC-reduce generally has a lower computational and memory complexity than K-FAC-expand. We
empirically verify this speed difference with a Wide ResNet on CIFAR-10. Moreover, we show that
the two K-FAC variations applied to a graph neural network and vision transformer can reach a fixed
validation metric target in 50-75% of the steps of a first-order reference method, which translates into
an almost equivalent decrease in wall-clock time. Although this does not demonstrate that K-FAC is
a superior training algorithm, it indicates the potential of extending K-FAC to modern deep learning
architectures. In general, K-FAC can be used as a drop-in Hessian approximation, e.g., in Laplace
approximations for Bayesian deep learning (Daxberger et al., 2021; MacKay, 1992; Ritter et al., 2018)
or in natural gradient variational inference (Khan et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018). To demonstrate
this, we show that K-FAC-reduce can speed up automatic weight decay selection via approximate
marginal likelihood optimisation, compared to the previously used K-FAC-expand.
2 Background
We consider the supervised learning setup with a dataset D of N i.i.d. samples {xn, yn}N
n=1, with
xn ∈ RD and yn ∈ RC, a neural net fθ : RD → RC, parameterised with θ ∈ RP , and a loss
function ℓ : RC ×RC → R, which is often equivalent to a negative log likelihood, i.e.ℓ(y, fθ(x)) =
− log p(y|fθ(x)). The DNN is usually trained with a (stochastic) gradient-based iterative update
rule, in its simplest form θt+1 = θt − α∇θt ℓ(y, fθt (x)), where t indicates the iteration and α is the
learning rate. If we assume a local quadratic approximation of the loss around the current parameter
iterate θt, we get a preconditioned gradient update step, i.e.
θt+1 = θt − α C −1
t ∇θt ℓ(y, fθt (x)), (1)
where Ct ∈ RP ×P is the symmetric positive definite (p.d.) preconditioner. Setting Ct to the Hessian
of the loss w.r.t. the model parameters Ht := ∇2
θt ℓ(y, fθt (x)) yields a simplified version of the
classic Newton’s method; however, sinceHt is expensive to compute, store, and not guaranteed to be
p.d., it is not commonly used in deep learning.
2.1 Second-order optimisation in deep learning
The term “second-order” is used ambiguously in the literature: it can refer to using second-order
derivatives like the Hessian of the loss w.r.t. the parameters of the model, or approximations thereof,
like the GGN, which however only contains second-order derivatives of the loss w.r.t. the model
outputs and not the parameters. It can also refer to using some variation of the second moment of the
(average) mini-batch gradient, which blurs the line between commonly used methods that are usually
considered “first-order” methods like Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015).
2