4 Experiments
In Section 4.1, we empirically validate the speed up of K-FAC-reduce compared to K-FAC-expand
in line with their computational complexities with a Wide ResNet on CIFAR-10 and show how this
scales with the batch size. Additionally, in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, we compare the two approximations
based on their downstream optimisation performance. We validate that both K-FAC variations can
reduce the number of required steps to achieve a fixed validation target compared to a well-tuned
first-order reference optimiser. For this, we use a GNN and a vision transformer (ViT), two of the
examples in Section 2.2. We leverage the codebase and validation metric targets of the MLCommons
algorithmic-efficiency (AlgoPerf) repository5 (Dahl et al., 2023), and use their target-setting
runs as reference runs. Both K-FAC variations use the same learning rate schedule as those target-
setting runs but the warmup and expected number of steps are multiplied by 0.75 to account for the
fact that second-order methods tend to require fewer steps. Additionally, we tune the learning rate and
damping for K-FAC via random search and set all other hyperparameters to the same values as the
reference target-setting run. To exclude the adjusted learning rate schedule and the additional tuning
of the learning rate as confounding factors, we additionally applied the same tuning to the reference
runs; however, none of these runs hit the target validation performance. Despite these considerations,
the experiments in Sections 4.2 and 4.3 arenot meant to demonstrate that K-FAC is a superior training
algorithm (see Appendix C.1). However, the reference runs allow us to put the training performances
of both K-FAC flavours into perspective and also indicate the potential of extending second-order
methods like K-FAC to modern neural network architectures Lastly, to demonstrate a use case of
K-FAC other than as a preconditioner, we automatically learn the weight decay hyperparameter
by optimising a Laplace approximation of the marginal likelihood in Section 4.4. Our K-FAC
implementation leverages the ASDL package (Osawa et al., 2023). See Appendix C for more details
on the experiments and additional results.
4.1 Update step speed with K-FAC-expand and K-FAC-reduce
Table 1: Timing [s] of an update step
with the two K-FAC variants for a Wide
ResNet on CIFAR-10.
K-FAC Batch size
128 256 512 1024 2048
expand 0.24 0 .38 0 .75 1 .36 OOM
reduce 0.17 0 .24 0 .43 0 .63 1 .17
To empirically validate the smaller computational com-
plexity of K-FAC-reduce compared to K-FAC-expand, we
time a single preconditioned gradient update step for a
Wide ResNet on CIFAR-10 with both approximations and
five different batch sizes on an NVIDIA V100 GPU (Ta-
ble 1). As expected based on the complexities of the two
approximations, we see increasing gains in speed with
increasing batch size. For the largest tested batch size,
2048, K-FAC-reduce is faster than K-FAC-expand is for
half the batch size. Moreover, K-FAC-expand runs out-of-memory (OOM) at a batch size of2048.
Notably, we implement both approximations with the naive unfold operation (c.f. Section 2.2), but
K-FAC-reduce could be implemented even more efficiently by never explicitly allocating memory
for the full unfolded layer input, which has been shown to lead to a further speed-up of about 4.5×
(Dangel, 2023). To highlight the speed difference of the two K-FAC variations for language models,
we compute a K-FAC GGN approximation for nanoGPT (Karpathy, 2023), a popular implementation
of GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), on the full DART dataset (Nan et al., 2021). K-FAC-reduce is
significantly faster than K-FAC-expand, which is currently used for transformers, only taking 70% of
the time of K-FAC-expand. We expect this discrepancy to become even more pronounced for larger
batch sizes and sequence lengths.
4.2 Graph neural network on ogbg-molpcba
We use a basic GraphNetwork (Battaglia et al., 2018) with multi-layer perceptrons as the update
functions (c.f. Appendix A) and train it on the ogbg-molpcba dataset (Hu et al., 2020) (Figure 3).
The target validation metric is a mean average precision (mAP) of 0.28098. The reference algorithm
is SGD with Nesterov momentum, with the tuned hyperparameters from the AlgoPerf target-setting
runs. For both K-FAC variations, the statistics and preconditioner are updated every 10 iterations.
We report the mean and standard error for five runs with different random seeds. The reference run
reaches the target in 31,887 ± 2,070 steps, whereas K-FAC-expand takes 16,106 ± 863 and K-FAC-
5https://bit.ly/algoperf
8