each mini-batch by 1/RM instead of 1/M.8 To apply K-FAC-reduce, we can use a scatter mean,
which aggregates tensor elements according to indices, to implement the mean (with the square
root scaling from Equation (55)) operation without having an explicit weight-sharing dimension.
Unfortunately, this creates two issues. First, we have to know that this adjustment to K-FAC is even
required for a specific layer since we cannot deduce it from the shape of the layer inputs. Second, the
scatter mean requires additional information, since we need to know to which graphs the nodes/edges
in the input belong. One approach to resolve these issues is to define a custom layer type for this type
of linear layer, which has an attribute containing the indices of all nodes/edges for each graph in the
batch. However, this requires changes to the model architecture implementation, because additional
attributes have to be set for the regular linear modules.
Besides the changes necessary for K-FAC-expand and K-FAC-reduce, we can use the same additional
algorithmic tools often used for optimisation with K-FAC. Typically,damping is used (Martens &
Grosse, 2015), i.e. a scalar is added to the diagonal of the two Kronecker factors A and B or the
diagonal of their product – the latter corresponds to adding the Hessian of an isotropic Gaussian
prior over the weights. Also, since we usually operate in the stochastic setting and only compute
the K-FAC approximation on mini-batches, sometimes an exponential moving average over the
Kronecker factors is used. However, in our experiments, we do not use such a moving average and
only compute K-FAC for a single mini-batch (besides for Figure 5, as mentioned in Appendix C.4)
and still reduce the update frequency of the K-FAC statistics and the preconditioner.
Computational considerations. Besides the implementation details, we also have to consider the
computational cost when deploying K-FAC approximations in practice. Here, we have to respect the
same constraints as with regular K-FAC. When we have a large output dimensionC, it is expensive
or even unfeasible to propagate the C × C loss Hessian Hfθ ℓ(yn, fθ(xn)) for each of the N data
points through the computation graph. Instead, we use the fact that we have
Ey∼p(y|fθ (xn))[∇fθ log p(y|fθ(xn))∇fθ log p(y|fθ(xn))⊺] = Hfθ ℓ(yn, fθ(xn)) (56)
and take S Monte Carlo (MC) samples from the model’s predictive distributionys ∼ p(y|fθ(xn).
Taking a single sample results in a rank-1 MC approximation of the true loss Hessian and only
requires the propagation of a single vector through the computation graph for each data point.
C Additional experimental details and results
C.1 MLCommons’ AlgoPerf benchmark for training algorithms
The goal of the AlgoPerf benchmark for training algorithms (Dahl et al., 2023) is to measure “train-
ing speedups due to algorithmic improvements” (MLCommons, 2022). Specifically, the benchmark
defines multiple workloads, where one workload is defined by the combination of a dataset, a neural
network model, a loss function, and a target performance defined by some evaluation metric. For
example, training a ViT on ImageNet using the cross-entropy loss until a target validation accuracy of
77.309% has been reached constitutes a workload. In the AlgoPerf benchmark, training algorithms
are compared on fixed hardware in terms of the wall-clock time they require to reach the fixed
validation target performance.
For our experiments, we use two of the workloads of the AlgoPerf benchmark as realistic deep
learning problems, to showcase the optimisation behaviour of our two K-FAC variations (Sections 4.2
and 4.3). Similar to the benchmark, we measure both the number of steps and the wall-clock time
necessary to reach the target validation metric. To put the training behaviour of K-FAC-expand
and K-FAC-reduce into perspective, we compare them to the target-setting run of the AlgoPerf
benchmark, denoted reference run in the experiments (Sections 4.2 and 4.3). To determine the
fixed validation target for each workload, four standard algorithms (AdamW, NAdamW, SGD with
Nesterov momentum (Nesterov), and SGD with heavy ball momentum) were each tuned with a
budget of 200 trials for every workload. The combination of algorithm and hyperparameters that
reached the highest validation performance within a fixed time was then run 20 times and the median
of the best achieved validation metric was set as the validation target. As our reference run, we use the
workload-specific, best-performing algorithm and hyperparameter combination. Note that this should
8As explained below Equation (55), we could also choose a different way of scaling here. We choose this
one as it enables a simple implementation in contrast to K-FAC-reduce.
29