260: D.3 Evaluation Protocol
261: We follow the evaluation protocol in previous works (Jing et al., 2021; Pan & Kang, 2021; Zhou et al., 2022) to conduct node classification and node clustering as semi-supervised and unsupervised downstream tasks, respectively.
262: For fine-tuning-based methods, we first train models with unlabeled data in a self-supervised manner and output learned node representations. After that, the resulting representations can be used for different downstream tasks. For the node classification task, we train a simple logistic regression classifier with a fixed iteration number, and then evaluate the effectiveness with Micro-F1 and Macro-F1 scores. For the node clustering task, we conduct clustering and split the learned representations into c clusters with the K-means algorithm, then calculate the normalized mutual information (NMI) and average rand index (ARI) to evaluate the performance of node clustering.
263: For prompt-tuning-based methods and the proposed adapter-tuning-based method, the models are also pre-trained in an unsupervised manner and output frozen representations. In the tuning stage, for the node classification task, we first obtain the predicted probability of each node by calculating the similarity between the prediction vector and each class-subgraph representation, and then using the softmax function to obtain class probabilities. Then, the class with the maximum likelihood for each node is designated as the predicted class. We also evaluate the effectiveness of models with Micro-F1 and Macro-F1 scores. For the node clustering task, we input the class probabilities to the K-means algorithm, then calculate the normalized mutual information (NMI) and average rand index (ARI) to evaluate the performance of node clustering.
264: (a) ACM
265: (b) Yelp
266: (c) DBLP
267: (d) Aminer
268: Figure 3: The training error of the proposed method with and without the structure tuning on all heterogeneous graph datasets.
269: (a) ACM
270: (b) Yelp
271: (c) DBLP
272: (d) Aminer
273: Figure 4: The generalization gap (the difference between test error and training error) of the proposed method with and without the labeled data extension on all heterogeneous graph datasets.
274: D.4 Model Architectures and Settings
275: As described in Section 2, the proposed method employs homogeneous and heterogeneous adapters to tune the homogeneous and heterogeneous graph structures (i.e., \mathbf{A} and \mathbf{S} ) and capture task-related structural information. Moreover, the proposed method employs the projection (i.e., g_{\vartheta} ) to obtain the prediction matrix \mathbf{P} . In the proposed method, homogeneous and heterogeneous adapters are simply implemented by two linear layers, followed by the ReLU activation. In addition, the projection g_{\vartheta} is also simply implemented by the linear layer. Finally, In the proposed method, all parameters were optimized by the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with an initial learning rate. In all experiments, we repeat the experiments five times for all methods and report the average results.
276: D.5 Computing Resource Details
277: All experiments were implemented in PyTorch and conducted on a server with 8 NVIDIA GeForce 3090 (24GB memory each). Almost every experiment can be done on an individual 3090, and the training time of all comparison methods as well as our method, is less than 1 hour.
