Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
A A DDITIONAL DISCUSSION ON TABM
A.1 M OTIVATION
Why BatchEnsemble? Among relatively ease-to-use “efficient ensembling” methods, beyond
BatchEnsemble, there are examples such as dropout ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017),
naive multi-head architectures, TreeNet (Lee et al., 2015). However, in the literature, they were
consistently outperformed by more advanced methods, including BatchEnsemble (Wen et al., 2020),
MIMO (Havasi et al., 2021), FiLM-Ensemble (Turkoglu et al., 2022).
Among advanced methods, BatchEnsemble seems to be one of the simplest and most flexible options.
For example, FiLM-Ensemble (Turkoglu et al., 2022) requires normalization layers to be presented in
the original architecture, which is not always the case for tabular MLPs. MIMO (Havasi et al., 2021),
in turn, imposes additional limitations compared to BatchEnsemble. First, it requires concatenating
(not stacking, as with BatchEnsemble) all k input representations, which increases the input size of
the first linear layer. With the relatively high number of submodels k = 32 used in our paper, this
can be an issue on datasets with a large number of features, especially when feature embeddings
(Gorishniy et al., 2022) are used. For example, for k = 32, the number of features m = 1000, and the
feature embedding size l = 32, the input size approaches one million resulting in an extremely large
first linear layer of MLP.Second, with BatchEnsemble, it is easy to explicitly materialize, analyze,
and prune individual submodels. By contrast, in MIMO, all submodels are implicitly entangled
within one MLP, and there is no easy way to access individual submodels.
Why MLPs? Despite the applicability of BatchEnsemble (Wen et al., 2020) to almost any architecture,
we focus specifically on MLPs. The key reason is efficiency. First, to achieve high performance,
throughout the paper, we use the relatively large number of submodels k = 32. However, the desired
less-than-×k runtime overhead of BatchEnsemble typically happens only when the original model
underutilizes the power of parallel computations of a given hardware. This will not be the case for
attention-based models on datasets with a large number of features, as well as for retrieval-based
models on datasets with a large number of objects. Second, as we show in subsection 4.3, attention-
and retrieval-based models are already slow as-is. By contrast, MLPs are exceptionally efficient, to
the extent that slowing them down even by an order of magnitude will still result in practical models.
Also, generally speaking, the definition of MLP suggested in subsection 3.3 and used in TabM is not
special, and more advanced MLP-like backbones can be used. However, in preliminary experiments,
we did not observe the benefits of more advanced backbones. Perhaps, small technical differences
between backbones become less impactful in the context of parameter-efficient ensembling, at least
in the scope of middle-to-large-sized datasets.
A.2 T ABM WITH FEATURE EMBEDDINGS
Notation. In this paper, we use † to mark TabM variants with the piecewise-linear embeddings (e.g.
TabM†
mini, TabM†, etc.).
Implementation details. In fact, there are no changes in the usage of feature embeddings compared
to plain MLPs: feature embeddings are applied, and the result is flattened, before being passed to
the backbones in terms of Figure 1. For example, if a dataset has m continuous features and all of
them are embedded, the very first adapter R will have the shape k × mde, where de is the feature
embedding size. For TabM†
mini and TabM†, we initialize the first multiplicative adapter R of the first
linear layer from the standard normal distribution N (0, 1). The remaining details are best understood
from the source code.
Efficiency. When feature embeddings are used, the simplified batching strategy from subsec-
tion 3.4 allows for more efficient implementation, when the feature embeddings are applied to the
original batch size objects, and the result is simply cloned k times (compared to embedding
k × batch size objects with the original batching strategy).
A.3 H YPERPARAMETERS
We noticed that the typical optimal learning rate for TabM is higher than for MLP (note that, on
each dataset, the batch size is the same for all DL models). We hypothesize that the reason is the
14