Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
deep ensembling, where most weights are shared between ensemble members, allow one to make
simple and strong tabular models out of plain MLPs. For example, MLP coupled with BatchEnsemble
(Wen et al., 2020) — a long-existing method — right away outperforms popular attention-based
models, such as FT-Transformer (Gorishniy et al., 2021), while being simpler and more efficient.
This result alone suggests that efficient ensembling is a low-hanging fruit for tabular DL.
Our work builds on the above observations and offers TabM — a new powerful and practical model
for researchers and practitioners. Drawing an informal parallel with GBDT (an ensemble of decision
trees), TabM can also be viewed as a simple base model (MLP) combined with an ensembling-like
technique, providing high performance and simple implementation at the same time.
Main contributions. We summarize our main contributions as follows:
1. We present TabM — a simple DL architecture for supervised learning on tabular data. TabM is
based on MLP and parameter-efficient ensembling techniques closely related to BatchEnsemble
(Wen et al., 2020). In particular, TabM produces Multiple predictions per object. TabM easily
competes with GBDT and outperforms prior tabular DL models, while being more efficient than
attention- and retrieval-based DL architectures.
2. We provide a fresh perspective on tabular DL models in a large-scale evaluation along four
dimensions: performance ranks, performance score distributions, training time, and inference
throughput. One of our findings is that MLPs, including TabM, hit an appealing performance-
efficiency tradeoff, which is not the case for attention- and retrieval-based models.
3. We show that the two key reasons for TabM’s high performance are the collective training of the
underlying implicit MLPs and the weight sharing. We also show that the multiple predictions of
TabM are weak and overfitted individually, while their average is strong and generalizable.
2 R ELATED WORK
Decision-tree-based models. Gradient-boosted decision trees (GBDT) (Chen & Guestrin, 2016; Ke
et al., 2017; Prokhorenkova et al., 2018) is a strong and efficient baseline for tabular tasks. GBDT is
a classic machine learning model, specifically, an ensemble of decision trees. Our model TabM is a
deep learning model, specifically, a parameter-efficient ensemble of MLPs.
Tabular deep learning architectures. A large number of deep learning architectures for tabular
data have been proposed over the recent years. That includes attention-based architectures (Song
et al., 2019; Gorishniy et al., 2021; Somepalli et al., 2021; Kossen et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2023),
retrieval-augmented architectures (Somepalli et al., 2021; Kossen et al., 2021; Gorishniy et al., 2024;
Ye et al., 2024), MLP-like models (Gorishniy et al., 2021; Klambauer et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020)
and others (Arik & Pfister, 2020; Popov et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2023b; Marton et al., 2024; Hollmann
et al., 2023). Compared to prior work, the key difference of our model TabM is its computation
flow, where oneTabM imitates an ensemble of MLPs by producing multiple independently trained
predictions. Prior attempts to bring ensemble-like elements to tabular DL (Badirli et al., 2020; Popov
et al., 2020) were not found promising (Gorishniy et al., 2021). Also, being a simple feed-forward
MLP-based model, TabM is significantly more efficient than some of the prior work. Compared to
attention-based models, TabM does not suffer from quadratic computational complexity w.r.t. the
dataset dimensions. Compared to retrieval-based models, TabM is easily applicable to large datasets.
Improving tabular MLP-like models. Multiple recent studies achieved competitive performance
with MLP-like architectures on tabular tasks by applying architectural modifications (Gorishniy et al.,
2022), regularizations (Kadra et al., 2021; Jeffares et al., 2023a; Holzm ¨uller et al., 2024), custom
training techniques (Bahri et al., 2021; Rubachev et al., 2022). Thus, it seems that tabular MLPs have
good potential, but one has to deal with overfitting and optimization issues to reveal that potential.
Our model TabM achieves high performance with MLP in a different way, namely, by using it as the
base backbone in a parameter-efficient ensemble in the spirit of BatchEsnsemble (Wen et al., 2020).
Our approach is orthogonal to the aforementioned training techniques and architectural advances.
Deep ensembles. In this paper, by a deep ensemble, we imply multiple DL models of the same
architecture trained independently (Jeffares et al., 2023b) for the same task under different random
seeds (i.e. with different initializations, training batch sequences, etc.). The prediction of a deep
ensemble is the mean prediction of its members. Deep ensembles often significantly outperform single
DL models of the same architecture (Fort et al., 2020) and can excel in other tasks like uncertainty
2