Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
3.2 A QUICK INTRODUCTION TO BATCHENSEMBLE .
For a given architecture, let’s consider any linear layer l in it: l(x) = W x + b, where x ∈ Rd1,
W ∈ Rd2×d1, b ∈ Rd2. To simplify the notation, let d1 = d2 = d. In a traditional deep ensemble, the
i-th member has its own set of weightsWi, bi for this linear layer: li(xi) = Wixi + bi, where xi is the
object representation within the i-th member. By contrast, in BatchEnsemble, this linear layer is either
(1) fully shared between all members, or (2) mostly shared: li(xi) = si ⊙ (W (ri ⊙ xi)) + bi, where
⊙ is the elementwise multiplication, W ∈ Rd×d is shared between all members, and ri, si, bi ∈ Rd
are not shared between the members. This is equivalent to defining the i-th weight matrix as
Wi = W ⊙ (sirT
i ). To ensure diversity of the ensemble members, ri and si of all members are ini-
tialized randomly with ±1. All other layers are fully shared between the members of BatchEnsemble.
The described parametrization allows packing all ensemble members in one model that simultaneously
takes k objects as input, and applies allk implicit members in parallel, without explicitly materializing
each member. This is achieved by replacing one or more linear layers of the original neural network
with their BatchEnsemble versions: lBE(X) = (( X ⊙ R)W ) ⊙ S + B, where X ∈ Rk×d stores k
object representations (one per member), and R, S, B ∈ Rd store the non-shared weights (ri, si, bi)
of the members, as shown at the lower left part of Figure 1.
Terminology. In this paper, we call ri, si, bi, R, S and B adapters, and the implicit members of
parameter-efficient emsembles (e.g. BatchEnsemble) — implicit submodels or simply submodels.
Overhead to the model size. With BatchEnsemble, adding a new ensemble member means adding
only one row to each of the matrices R, S, and B, which results in 3d new parameters per layer. For
typical values of d, this is a negligible overhead to the original layer size d2 + d.
Overhead to the runtime. Thanks to the modern hardware, the large number of shared weights
and the parallel execution of the k forward passes, the runtime overhead of BatchEnsemble can be
(significantly) lower than ×k (Wen et al., 2020). Intuitively, if the original workload underutilizes the
hardware, there are more chances to pay less than ×k overhead.
3.3 A RCHITECTURE
TabM is one model representing an ensemble of k MLPs. Contrary to conventional deep ensembles,
in TabM, the k MLPs are trained in parallel and share most of their weights by default, which
leads to better performance and efficiency. We present multiple variants of TabM that differ in their
weight-sharing strategies, where TabM and TabMmini are the most effective variants, and TabMpacked
is a conceptually important variant potentially useful in some cases. We obtain our models in several
steps, starting from essential baselines. We always use the ensemble size k = 32 and analyze this
hyperparameter in subsection 5.3. In subsection A.1, we explain that using MLP as the base model is
crucial because of its excellent efficiency.
MLP. We define MLP as a sequence of N simple blocks followed by a linear prediction head:
MLP(x) = Linear(BlockN (. . . (Block1(x))), where Blocki(x) = Dropout(ReLU(Linear((x))).
MLP×k = MLP + Deep Ensemble. We denote the traditional deep ensemble of k independently
trained MLPs as MLP×k. To clarify, this means tuning hyperparameters of one MLP, then indepen-
dently training k tuned MLPs under different random seeds, and then averaging their predictions.
The performance of MLP×k is reported in Figure 2. Notably, the results are already better and more
stable than those of FT-Transformer (Gorishniy et al., 2021) — the popular attention-based baseline.
Although the described approach is a somewhat default way to implement an ensemble, it is not
optimized for the task performance of the ensemble. First, for each of the k MLPs, the training is
stopped based on the individual validation score, which is optimal for each individual MLP, but can
be suboptimal for their ensemble. Second, the hyperparameters are also tuned for one MLP without
knowing about the subsequent ensembling. All TabM variants are free from these issues.
TabMpacked = MLP + Packed-Ensemble. As the first step towards better and more efficient en-
sembles of MLPs, we implement k MLPs as one large model using Packed-Ensemble (Laurent
et al., 2023). This results in TabMpacked illustrated in Figure 1. As an architecture, TabMpacked is
equivalent to MLP×k and stores k independent MLPs without any weight sharing. However, the
critical difference is that TabM processes k inputs in parallel, which means that one training step
of TabM consists of k parallel training steps of the individual MLPs. This allows monitoring the
4