Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
spaces for most models are provided in individual sections below (example forTabM: subsection D.9).
We follow Rubachev et al. (2024) and use 25 iterations on some datasets from Table 5.
Evaluation. On a given dataset, for a given model, the tuned hyperparameters are evaluated under
multiple (in most cases, 15) random seeds. The mean test metric and its standard deviation over these
random seeds are then used to compare algorithms as described in subsection D.3.
D.3 M ETRICS
We use Root Mean Squared Error for regression tasks, ROC-AUC for classification datasets from
Table 5 (following Rubachev et al. (2024)), and accuracy for the rest of datasets (following Gorishniy
et al. (2024)). We also tried computing ROC-AUC for all classification datasets, but did not observe
any significant changes (see Figure 11), so we stuck to prior work. By default, the mean test score
and its standard deviation are obtained by training a given model with tuned hyperparameters from
scratch on a given dataset under 15 different random seeds.
How we compute ranks. Our method of computing ranks used in Figure 3 does not count small
improvements as wins, hence the reduced range of ranks compared to other studies. Intuitively, our
ranks can be considered as “tiers”.
Recall that, on a given dataset, the performance of a given model A is expressed with the mean Amean
and the standard deviation Astd of the performance score computed after the evaluation under multiple
random seeds. Assuming the higher score the better, we define that the model A is better than the
model B if: Amean − Astd > Bmean. In other words, a model is considered better if it has a better mean
score and the margin is larger than the standard deviation.
On a given dataset, when there are many models, we sort them in descending score order. Starting
from the best model (with a rank equal to1) we iterate over models and assign the rank1 to all models
that are no worse than the best model according to the above rule. The first model in descending
order that is worse than the best model is assigned rank 2 and becomes the new reference model. We
continue the process until all models are ranked. Ranks are computed independently for each dataset.
D.4 I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF SUBSECTION 4.3
Applicability to large datasets. The two datasets used in Table 2 are thefull versions of the “Weather”
and “Maps Routing” datasets from the TabReD benchmark Rubachev et al. (2024). Their smaller
versions with subsampled training set were already included in Table 1 and were used when building
Figure 3. The validation and test sets are the same for the small and large versions of these datasets,
so the task metrics are comparable between the two versions. When running models on the large
versions of the datasets, we reused the hyperparameters tuned for their small versions. Thus, this
experiment can be seen as a quick assessment of the applicability of several tabular DL to large
datasets without a strong focus on the task performance. All models, except for FT-Transformer,
were evaluated under 3 random seeds. FT-Transformer was evaluated under 1 random seed.
D.5 I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF SUBSECTION 5.1
Experiment setup. This paragraph complements the description of the experiment setup in subsec-
tion 5.1. Namely, in addition to what is mentioned in the main text:
• Dropout and weight decay are turned off.
• To get representative training profiles for all models, the learning rates are tuned
separately for TabMk=1
mini and TabMk=32
mini on validation sets using the usual metrics
(i.e. RMSE or accuracy) as the guidance. The grid for learning rate tuning was:
numpy.logspace(numpy.log10(1e-5), numpy.log10(5e-3), num=25) .
D.6 I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF SUBSECTION 5.2
TabM[G]. Here, we clarify the implementation details for TabM[G] described in subsection 5.2.
TabM[G] is obtained from a trained TabM by greedily selecting submodels from TabM starting from
the best one and stopping when two conditions are simultaneously true for the first time: (1) adding
19