Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
TABM: A DVANCING TABULAR DEEP LEARNING
WITH PARAMETER -E FFICIENT ENSEMBLING
Yury Gorishniy ∗
Yandex
Akim Kotelnikov
HSE University, Yandex
Artem Babenko
Yandex
ABSTRACT
Deep learning architectures for supervised learning on tabular data range from
simple multilayer perceptrons (MLP) to sophisticated Transformers and retrieval-
augmented methods. This study highlights a major, yet so far overlooked opportu-
nity for designing substantially better MLP-based tabular architectures. Namely,
our new model TabM relies onefficient ensembling, where one TabM efficiently imi-
tates an ensemble of MLPs and produces multiple predictions per object. Compared
to a traditional deep ensemble, in TabM, the underlying implicit MLPs are trained
simultaneously, and (by default) share most of their parameters, which results in
significantly better performance and efficiency. Using TabM as a new baseline, we
perform a large-scale evaluation of tabular DL architectures on public benchmarks
in terms of both task performance and efficiency, which renders the landscape of
tabular DL in a new light. Generally, we show that MLPs, including TabM, form
a line of stronger and more practical models compared to attention- and retrieval-
based architectures. In particular, we find that TabM demonstrates the best perfor-
mance among tabular DL models. Then, we conduct an empirical analysis on the
ensemble-like nature of TabM. We observe that the multiple predictions of TabM
are weak individually, but powerful collectively. Overall, our work brings an im-
pactful technique to tabular DL and advances the performance-efficiency trade-off
with TabM — a simple and powerful baseline for researchers and practitioners. The
code is available at: https://github.com/yandex-research/tabm.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Supervised learning on tabular data is a ubiquitous machine learning (ML) scenario in a wide range
of industrial applications. Among classic non-deep-learning methods, the state-of-the-art solution
for such tasks is gradient-boosted decision trees (GBDT) (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018; Chen &
Guestrin, 2016; Ke et al., 2017). Deep learning (DL) models for tabular data, in turn, are reportedly
improving, and the most recent works claim to perform on par or even outperform GBDT on academic
benchmarks (Hollmann et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b;a; Gorishniy et al., 2024).
However, from the practical perspective, it is unclear if tabular DL offers any obvious go-to baselines
beyond simple architectures in the spirit of a multilayer perceptron (MLP). First, the scale and
consistency of performance improvements of new methods w.r.t. simple MLP-like baselines are not
always explicitly analyzed in the literature. Thus, one has to infer those statistics from numerous
per-dataset performance scores, which makes it hard to reason about the progress. At the same
time, due to the extreme diversity of tabular datasets, consistency is an especially valuable and
hard-to-achieve property for a hypothetical go-to baseline. Second, efficiency-related properties,
such as training time, and especially inference throughput, sometimes receive less attention. While
methods are usually equally affordable on small-to-medium datasets (e.g. <100K objects), their
applicability to larger datasets remains uncertain. Third, some recent work generally suggests that the
progress on academic benchmarks may not transfer that well to real-world tasks (Rubachev et al.,
2024). With all the above in mind, in this work, we thoroughly evaluate existing tabular DL methods
and find that non-MLP models do not yet offer a convincing replacement for MLPs.
At the same time, we identify a previously overlooked path towards more powerful, reliable, and
reasonably efficient tabular DL models. In a nutshell, we find that the parameter-efficient approach to
∗The corresponding author: yurygorishniy@gmail.com
1
arXiv:2410.24210v3  [cs.LG]  18 Feb 2025