Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
effectively larger batch size for TabM because of how the training batches are constructed (even if
the simplified batching strategy from subsection 3.4 is used).
A.4 L IMITATIONS AND PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
TabM does not introduce any new limitations compared to BatchEnsemble (Wen et al., 2020).
Nevertheless, we note the following:
• The MLP backbone used in TabM is one of the simplest possible, and generally, more advanced
backbones can be used. That said, some backbones may require additional care when used in
TabM. For example, we did not explore backbones with normalization layers. For such layers, it
is possible to allocate non-shared trainable affine transformations for each implicit submodel
by adding one multiplicative and one additive adapter after the normalization layer (i.e. like in
FiLM-Ensemble (Turkoglu et al., 2022)). Additional experiments are required to find the best
strategy.
• For ensemble-like models, such as TabM, the notion of “the final object embedding“ changes:
now, it is not a single vector, but a set of k vectors. If exactly one object embedding is required,
then additional experiments may be needed to find the best way to combine k embeddings into
one. The presence of multiple object embeddings can also be important for scenarios when
TabM is used for solving more than one task, in particular when it is pretrained as a generic
feature extractor and then reused for other tasks. The main practical guideline is that the k
prediction branches should not interact with each other (e.g. through attention, pooling, etc.)
and should always be trained separately.
B E XTENDED RESULTS
This section complements section 4.
B.1 A DDITIONAL BASELINES
In addition to the models from subsection 4.1, we consider the following baselines:
• MLP-PLR Gorishniy et al. (2022), that is, an MLP with periodic embeddings.
• ResNet (Gorishniy et al., 2021)
• SNN (Klambauer et al., 2017)
• DCNv2 (Wang et al., 2020)
• AutoInt (Song et al., 2019)
• MLP-Mixer is our adaptation of Tolstikhin et al. (2021) for tabular data.
• Trompt (Chen et al., 2023b) (our reimplementation, since there is no official implementation)
We also evaluated TabPFN (Hollmann et al., 2023), where possible. The results for this model are
available only in Appendix E because this model is by design not applicable to regression tasks,
which is a considerable number of our datasets. Overall, TabPFN specializes in small datasets. In
line with that, the performance of TabPFN on our benchmark was not competitive.
B.2 T ASK PERFORMANCE
Figure 8 is a different version of Figure 3 with additional baselines. Overall, none of the additional
baselines affect our main story.
Figure 9 is the critical difference diagram (CDD) computed over exactly the same results that were
used for building Figure 3.
15