Figure 1: In (a), DARE can effectively eliminate 90% or even 99% delta parameters of WizardMath
without sacrificing much performance on GSM8K. In (b), LM, MATH, and Code are abbreviations
of WizardLM-13B, WizardMath-13B, and llama-2-13b-code-alpaca. DARE can merge several task-
specific SFT language models into a single model, which supports the utilities of all SFT models.
paper, we astonishingly find that LMs, similar to Apocalypse and Super Mario, can enhance their
capabilities by absorbing other models without the need for training or GPUs.
Formally, Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is the most widely adopted strategy for assigning task-
specific capabilities to LMs by optimizing their parameters [ 13, 67]. The effectiveness of SFT is
fully evident in the alteration of the model parameters before and after SFT, referred to as delta
parameters [12]. We initially demonstrate that SFT LM (either encoder- or decoder-based) always
tends to acquire excessively redundant delta parameters. To be specific, we present DARE, which
randomly resets some delta parameters to zeros based on a drop rate p and subsequently scales the
remaining parameters by a factor of 1/(1 − p). Despite its simplicity, with the assistance of DARE,
when the LM model parameters reach 70 billion, we can eliminate up to 99% delta parameters with
minimal impact on model performance (see Figure 1(a)). The more parameters the LM has, the
larger p it can tolerate. This discovery suggests that SFT LM indeed learns a multitude of low-rank
structures akin to LoRA [25]. Thus, even when most of these structures are removed, resulting in a
low-rank and extremely sparse delta parameter set, the LM can still retain its capabilities.
Based on this observation, we can confidently merge multiple homologous SFT LMs (pre-trained
from the same backbone) without significant concerns about the decrease in their capabilities. As
long as a small portion of the delta parameters remains unaffected in the merging process, the abilities
of LMs unlocked by SFT can still be preserved. We first employ DARE to eliminate redundant
delta parameters in each model before merging, which can potentially mitigate the interference of
parameters among multiple models [ 62]. Then, we apply established model merging techniques
[59, 26, 44, 27, 62] to the parameters with reduced redundancy to create a single model with diverse
capabilities. We conduct extensive experiments on encoder-based LMs on eight datasets from the
GLUE benchmark, and decoder-based Llama 2 with three distinct abilities: instruction-following,
mathematical reasoning, and code-generating. We observe that:
(1) SFT LMs exhibit a substantial number of redundant delta parameters whether they are based on
BERT, RoBERTa, or Llama 2. DARE allows the removal of approximately 90% or even 99% delta
parameters without significantly affecting the performance of downstream tasks. The rescale operation
in DARE is a crucial component to guarantee effective ablations of delta parameters. Without
rescaling, removing only 10% delta parameters would noticeably affect performance. We attribute
this phenomenon to the fact that rescaling helps preserve the connectivity of model parameters [46].
(2) DARE is able to enhance the performance of most existing model merging methods when merging
encoder-based LMs on the eight datasets from GLUE. When it comes to larger LMs based on Llama
2, the simple parameter averaging method can already produce surprisingly good results. As shown
in Figure 1(b), we merge WizardLM and WizardMath by combining DARE and parameter averaging,
leading to a significant improvement of WizardLM’s mathematical reasoning ability from 2.2 to 64.2
accuracy on GSM8K, while also modestly enhancing its instruction-following ability with win rate
from 67.2 to 67.5 on AlpacaEval. It is worth noticing that all these benefits are achieved by solely
using CPUs without further training. Similar improvements can also be observed when merging
code-generating models.
2