(3) DARE is applicable to SFT delta parameters whose value ranges are relatively small. Different
from the observations of delta parameters, dropping only 10% fine-tuned parameters would lead to a
catastrophic decrease in performance, even approaching zero. We also find that the delta parameters
of SFT LMs usually stay within a range of 0.005 or less, indicating minimal modifications to the
pre-trained LM. However, once we continue pre-training, the delta parameters can rapidly reach
around 0.03, making DARE infeasible. This further confirms that SFT primarily unlocks the abilities
of the pre-trained LM, rather than introducing additional abilities.
Last but not least, we have implemented an open-sourced codebase at https://github.com/
yule-BUAA/MergeLM, which integrates existing popular model merging methods and supports both
encoder- and decoder-based language models. We hope this work can advance the understanding of
how alignment works from the perspective of parameters.
2 Related Work
Supervised Fine-tuning of Language Models. Supervised fine-tuning of language models aims
to impart pre-trained LMs with particular abilities by optimizing them on task-specific labeled data,
which has become the de facto standard paradigm in natural language processing [ 13, 67]. Full
Fine-Tuning (FFT) is a conventional category of SFT [47, 11], which fully adjusts all the parameters
of LMs but will become prohibitively expensive with the increasing size of LMs [43, 21]. To tackle
this issue, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) has been proposed, which only updates a small
number of parameters (either inherently in LMs or extra introduced) while freezing the remaining
major parameters [24, 38, 35, 32, 25]. Indeed, the effects of SFT (whether FFT or PEFT) can be
ultimately captured by the difference between parameters of LMs before and after SFT, i.e., delta
parameters. In this paper, we conduct a thorough analysis of the delta parameters of various SFT LMs
and find they are extremely redundant. We propose an innovative approach to achieve competitive
performance with standard SFT LMs by removing most (90% or even 99%) delta parameters.
Network Pruning Technique. With the rapidly increasing size of neural networks, network pruning
technique has been widely applied to reduce the computational costs [7, 37]. The objective of network
pruning is to eliminate unnecessary model parameters whiling maintaining the performance as much
as possible [68, 40, 16, 17, 60]. Magnitude-based pruning is one classical pruning method, which
selects parameters according to their magnitudes (i.e., absolute parameter values) [20, 34, 31]. To be
specific, parameters with magnitudes lower than a certain threshold are removed, and the remaining
parameters are preserved. In fact, the proposed DARE is somewhat related to the concept of network
pruning since DARE can also drop parameters. But it differs from existing pruning methods in two
main aspects: 1) DARE focuses on delta parameters while most pruning methods operate on the
fine-tuned parameters; 2) DARE is data-free and training-free without the requirements of any extra
data or (iterative) retraining, which are often needed by previous pruning methods.
Model Merging. Model merging has become a trending research direction in recent years, which aims
to merge multiple task-specific models into a single model with diverse abilities [59, 44, 26, 27, 62,
65]. The superiority of model merging over multi-task learning [9, 66] (which also intends to obtain
one model with several abilities) is that model merging usually pays attention to the combination of
model parameters without accessing the original training data [44, 27]. Average Merging [59] is one
common model merging approach, which utilizes averaged parameters to construct the merged model.
Task Arithmetic [26] employs a pre-defined scaling term to distinguish the importance of various
models. Fisher Merging [44] performs automatic weighted merging of parameters, where the weights
are calculated by the Fisher information matrix [15]. RegMean [27] masterly solves model merging
by optimizing a linear regression problem with closed-form solutions. TIES-Merging [62] tackles
the task conflicts in [26] by trimming low-magnitude parameters, resolving sign disagreements, and
disjointly merging parameters with consistent signs. In this paper, we employ DARE as a general
preprocessing technique for existing model merging methods by first sparsifying delta parameters of
several SFT homologous models and then merging them into a single model, which is equipped with
the abilities of all SFT models.
Federated Learning. In federated learning, multiple data owners collaboratively train a model in an
iterative process with the guarantee of data privacy [63, 64]. The model merging technique naturally
satisfies data privacy requirements and can be treated as a single iteration in federated learning,
which wishes to effectively integrate the messages of data owners (usually denoted as model updates
3