Language Models are Super Mario: Absorbing
Abilities from Homologous Models as a Free Lunch
Le Yu, Bowen Yu∗, Haiyang Yu, Fei Huang, Yongbin Li∗
Alibaba Group
{chuanyi.yl, yubowen.ybw, yifei.yhy, f.huang, shuide.lyb}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
Humans have harbored a longstanding desire to acquire additional abilities through
absorption. Super Mario
 serves as an embodiment of this human dream, which
can collect items to gain extra skills such as throwing fireballs and being temporarily
invincible. In this paper, we uncover that Language Models (LMs), either encoder-
or decoder-based, can obtain new capabilities by assimilating the parameters of
homologous models without the need for retraining or GPUs. Typically, new
abilities of LMs can be imparted by Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), reflected in
the disparity between fine-tuned and pre-trained parameters (i.e., delta parameters).
We initially observe that by introducing a novel operation called DARE (Drop And
REscale), most of the delta parameters can be directly set to zeros without affecting
the capabilities of SFT LMs and larger models can tolerate a higher proportion
of discarded parameters. Based on this observation, we further sparsify delta
parameters of multiple SFT homologous models with DARE and subsequently
merge them into a single model by parameter averaging. We conduct experiments
on eight datasets from the GLUE benchmark with BERT and RoBERTa. We also
merge WizardLM, WizardMath, and Code Alpaca based on Llama 2. Experimental
results show that: (1) The delta parameter value ranges for SFT models are typically
small, often within 0.005, and DARE can eliminate 99% of them effortlessly.
However, once the models are continuously pre-trained, the value ranges can grow
to around 0.03, making DARE impractical. We have also tried to remove fine-tuned
instead of delta parameters and find that a 10% reduction can lead to drastically
decreased performance (even to 0.0). This highlights that SFT merely stimulates
the abilities via delta parameters rather than injecting new abilities into LMs; (2)
DARE can merge multiple task-specific LMs into one LM with diverse abilities.
For instance, the merger of WizardLM and WizardMath increases the GSM8K zero-
shot accuracy of WizardLM from 2.2 to 66.3, retaining its instruction-following
ability while surpassing WizardMath’s original 64.2 performance. All resources
are available at https://github.com/yule-BUAA/MergeLM.
1 Introduction
Human beings have always expressed their ambition to acquire additional abilities through various
ways such as movies and games. For example, in X-Men’s Apocalypse, the character can absorb the
powers of other mutants to strengthen himself. Likewise, the protagonist in the Super Mario games
can gain superpowers like throwing fireballs by absorbing in-game items. Large Language Models
(LLMs), such as GPT-4 [45], can reasonably be considered as early iterations of artificial general
intelligence systems, given their performance is remarkably close to human-level capabilities. In this
∗Corresponding author.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2311.03099v1  [cs.CL]  6 Nov 2023