in practice). Since our DARE can facilitate the model merging task, we believe it can serve as a
promising solution for the federated learning field.
3 Methodology
3.1 Preliminaries
SFT Delta Parameters . Let θPRE ∈ Rd denote the parameters of a pre-trained LM ( d is the
dimension), such as LLaMA [53] or Llama 2 [54]. For task t, SFT can provide a fine-tuned LM with
parameters θt
SFT ∈ Rd by optimizing the pre-trained model on task-specific data. Give the parameters
of both pre-trained LM ( θPRE) and SFT LM ( θt
SFT), we define delta parameters as the difference
between parameters of LMs before and after SFT, which is computed by δt = θt
SFT − θPRE ∈ Rd.
Delta parameters reflect the changes in parameters during the SFT process and analyzing the properties
of delta parameters can offer a better understanding of SFT.
Model Merging Problem. Given a set of tasks {t1, t2, · · · , tK} and K fine-tuned models on these
tasks with parameters

θt1
SFT, θt2
SFT, · · · , θtK
SFT
	
, model merging aims to integrate the parameters of K
models into a single model that can well handle K tasks simultaneously. Following [44, 27, 62], we
focus on merging fine-tuned models that are optimized from the same pre-trained backbone.
3.2 DARE: A Simple Approach for Reducing Delta Parameter Redundancy
In this work, we investigate the extremely redundant properties of the delta parameters of SFT LMs
and propose DARE to effectively reduce delta parameter redundancy. DARE is the abbreviation of
Drop And REscale, whose workflow is shown in Figure 2(a). Given the delta parameters of an SFT
LM, DARE first randomly drops the parameters based on a specific drop rate and then rescales the
remaining ones to obtain parameters with reduced redundancy. We find DARE can approximately
eliminate 90% or even 99% delta parameters without sacrificing much performance on both encoder-
and decoder-based LMs.
Figure 2: Illustrations of DARE and merging models with DARE. DARE can achieve comparable
performance with standard SFT when it removes 90% or even 99% delta parameters. Moreover,
DARE is able to tackle the parameter interference issue when merging models and yield consistent
improvements. We denote the abilities of different elements for math/code-related tasks at the top.
4