Figure 1: Singular value distributions for the task vector
in layer 1. We show the top-100 singular values, out of
4096 within the full rank.
by the minimum of their ranks. Therefore, we pro-
pose LORE-M ERGING , a unified framework for
model merging based on Low-Rank Estimation
of task vectors, which eliminates the need for ac-
cess to the base model. Specifically, given a set
of FT models, we formulate the merging problem
as an optimization problem whose goal is to si-
multaneously identify an approximate base model
integrated with a set of low-rank task vectors. To-
gether, these vectors collectively approximate the
behavior of the FT models. By leveraging low-rank
estimations, task vectors become inherently less
susceptible to interference, effectively addressing a
fundamental challenge in model merging. We con-
duct extensive experiments on optimization model-
ing problems and math word problems to confirm
the effectiveness of our method.
2 Related Work
Merging fine-tuned models has been shown to offer
several benefits, such as improving performance
on a single target task (Gupta et al., 2020; Choshen
et al., 2022; Wortsman et al., 2022), enhancing out-
of-domain generalization (Cha et al., 2021; Arpit
et al., 2022; Ilharco et al., 2022; Ramé et al., 2023),
creating multi-task models from different tasks (Jin
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Yadav et al., 2024),
supporting continual learning (Yadav and Bansal,
2022; Yadav et al., 2023), and addressing other
challenges (Don-Yehiya et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022).
Besides the full parameters merging, Prabhakar
et al. (2024); Jang et al. (2024) discussed the model
merging for LoRA parameters. Among these meth-
ods, task-vector-based merging approaches play
an important role. Task Arithmetic (Ilharco et al.,
2022) first introduced the concept of task vectors
and shows that simple arithmetic operations can
be performed to obtain the merged models. Build-
ing on this idea, methods like DARE (Yu et al.,
2024b) and TIES-Merging (Yadav et al., 2024)
adopt pruning-then-scaling techniques to merge
task vectors, based on the assumption that not all
parameters equally contribute to the final perfor-
mance. However, these methods based on sparsity
estimation consistently suffer from the interference
among task vectors and require access to the base
model, thus limiting their overall effectiveness.
3 Methodology
3.1 Problem Setting
We denotes Mi as the candidate models to be
merged, where eachMi is parameterized by θi. In
this work, we focus on the homogeneous model
merging (Wortsman et al., 2022; Ilharco et al.,
2022; Yadav et al., 2024), suggesting that the base
models share the same model architecture. Specifi-
cally, these models can be obtained from the train-
ing process, such as checkpoints, or fine-tuned
from the same pre-trained model, referred to as
task-specific models. The primary objective of
model merging is to construct a new model,M∗,
having better performance on the target single or
multiple tasks.
3.2 Implicit Low-Rank Estimation for Model
Merging
In this study, drawing upon methodologies similar
to those presented by Matena and Raffel (2022),
we investigate the model merging problem without
presupposing specific characteristics of, or requir-
ing access to, a base model. This methodologi-
cal decision is underpinned by several key ratio-
nales. Firstly, in the context of checkpoint merging
(Liu et al., 2024), a prevalent scenario involves ac-
cess restricted solely to checkpoints saved during
the training trajectory, before the finalization of
a base model. Consequently, in such instances,
the assumption of a pre-defined base model is
untenable. Furthermore, as demonstrated by Yu
et al. (2024b,a), model pairs frequently exhibit
21920