limited mergeability, particularly when subjected
to extensive fine-tuning or prolonged pre-training,
which can induce substantial parametric shifts. Un-
der these circumstances, existing task-vector-based
merging techniques often prove less effective due
to significant representational divergence between
an original base model and its fine-tuned counter-
part. To surmount this challenge, we introduce
LORE-M ERGING , an implicit low-rank estimation
approach to model merging. This method lever-
ages the inherent robustness of low-rank estimation
against perturbations while obviating the require-
ment for base model access.
The core idea of LORE-M ERGING is straight-
forward: instead of using the original base model,
we first construct an approximate base model and
subsequently integrate the task-specific vectors via
a low-rank approximation technique. Formally,
denote the FT models as {θi}n
i=1 wheren is the
number of FT models. To address this, our method
proceeds in two steps.
Step 1: Approximating the Base Model : We
first approximate a base model from the FT models,
denoted as θ0. Subsequently, the task vector for
each model is defined as δi := θi−θ0.
Step 2: Enforcing Low-Rank Constraint :
Based on observations in this paper, these task
vectors{δi}should exhibit a low-rank property.
Directly enforcing a low-rank constraint on δi is
challenging as it typically involves solving a non-
convex constrained minimization problem. There-
fore, following the established work (Candes and
Recht, 2008), we propose using a nuclear norm
penalty on δi. As proven in (Candes and Recht,
2008), the nuclear norm penalty effectively pro-
motes the low-rank property of δi.
To achieve both steps, we propose solving the
following minimization problem:
min
θ0,δ1,...,δn
f :=
n∑
i=1
(
∥θ0 + δi−θi∥2
F +µ∥δi∥2
∗
)
,
(1)
Here, the first term ensures an accurate approxima-
tion of (Step 1), and the second term, incorporating
the nuclear norm, effectively enforces the low-rank
constraint on the task vectors (Step 2).
This problem is a standard multi-variable con-
vex optimization problem. To solve it effi-
ciently, we employ the coordinate descent method
(Wright, 2015). Starting from an initial point
{θ0
0, δ0
1,..., δ0
n}, each iteration (roundk + 1) up-
dates the variables by iteratively solving the follow-
ing single-variable minimization problem:



θk+1
0 = arg min
θ
f(θ, δk
1,···, δk
n)
δk+1
i = arg min
δ
f(···, δk
i−1, δ, δk
i+1,···),∀i
(2)
The update for θ∗
0 is trivial, while the update
for δ is less straightforward due to the presence
of the nuclear norm. Fortunately, as shown in Cai
et al. (2010), closed-form solutions for the coor-
dinate descent method iterations in Problem (1)
can be obtained using the Singular Value Thresh-
olding (SVT) technique. Recall that for a given
matrix δ with the Singular Value Decomposi-
tion (SVD) δ = UΣV⊤, and a hyperparameter
µ, the SVT operator is defined as follows. Let
Σ +(µ) := diag((σi−µ)+), where (·)+ denotes
the positive part function. The SVT( δ;µ) op-
erator with hyperparameter µis then defined as
SVT(δ;µ) :=UΣ +(µ)V⊤. Using the SVT opera-
tor, the update for δi can be expressed as: δk+1
i =
SVT(θi−θk+1
0 ;µ).
Once the optimization problem is solved, we can
obtain the approximate base model and a set of low-
rank task vectors. Then, existing task-vector based
approaches, such as Average Merging and TIES-
Merging, can be applied to combine the task vec-
tors and the base model. In this work, we directly
adopt Average Merging as our post-calculation
merging methods for simplicity, as as it demon-
strated comparable performance to TIES-Merging
in our preliminary experiments. The overall pro-
cess is outlined in Algorithm 1.
4 Experiments
Baselines & Settings We compare LORE-
MERGING with following popular merging meth-
ods. A verage Merging (Choshen et al., 2022):
This method computes the element-wise mean of
all the individual models. DARE (Yu et al., 2024b):
This approach randomly drops task-specific vectors
and rescales the remaining vectors back to the base
model. We set the hyperparameter for the random
probability to 0.5. TIES-Merging (Yadav et al.,
2024): In this method, task-specific vectors are ran-
domly dropped, and only the parameters aligned
with the final agreed-upon sign are merged. For
TIES-merging, we set the top-k value to 20%, and
the hyperparameter λis fixed at 1. For LORE-
MERGING , the rankr is determined dynamically.
For a given task vector δ∈Rm×n, we set the rank
r = 0.2×min{m,n}to get a low-rank estimation.
21921