Resolving Interference When Merging Models
Prateek Yadav1 Derek Tam1
Leshem Choshen2 Colin Raffel1 Mohit Bansal1
1 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 2 IBM Research
leshem.choshen@il.ibm.com
{praty,dtredsox,craffel,mbansal}@cs.unc.edu
Abstract
Transfer learning – i.e., further fine-tuning a pre-trained model on a downstream
task – can confer significant advantages, including improved downstream perfor-
mance, faster convergence, and better sample efficiency. These advantages have
led to a proliferation of task-specific fine-tuned models, which typically can only
perform a single task and do not benefit from one another. Recently, model merging
techniques have emerged as a solution to combine multiple task-specific models
into a single multitask model without performing additional training. However,
existing merging methods often ignore the interference between parameters of
different models, resulting in large performance drops when merging multiple
models. In this paper, we demonstrate that prior merging techniques inadvertently
lose valuable information due to two major sources of interference: (a) interfer-
ence due to redundant parameter values and (b) disagreement on the sign of a
given parameter’s values across models. To address this, we propose our method,
TRIM, ELECT SIGN & MERGE (TIES -MERGING ), which introduces three novel
steps when merging models: (1) resetting parameters that only changed a small
amount during fine-tuning, (2) resolving sign conflicts, and (3) merging only the
parameters that are in alignment with the final agreed-upon sign. We find that
TIES -MERGING outperforms several existing methods in diverse settings covering
a range of modalities, domains, number of tasks, model sizes, architectures, and
fine-tuning settings. We further analyze the impact of different types of interference
on model parameters, and highlight the importance of resolving sign interference.1
1 Introduction
Pre-trained models (PTMs) have become widespread in many real-world applications [83, 6]. Using
PTMs typically involves fine-tuning them to specialize on a specific task [65, 12], which can lead to
improved performance with less task-specific labeled data. These benefits have resulted in the release
of thousands of finetuned checkpoints [75] derived from popular PTMs such as ViT [14] for vision
and T5 [54] for language. However, having a separate fine-tuned model for each task has various
drawbacks: (1) for each new application, a separate model has to be stored and deployed [17, 81], and
(2) models trained in isolation cannot leverage information from related tasks to improve in-domain
performance or out-of-domain generalization [62, 54, 70]. Multitask learning [62, 53] could address
these concerns but requires costly training and simultaneous access to all tasks [17]. Moreover, it can
be complex and resource-intensive to determine how best to mix datasets to ensure that multitask
training is beneficial for all tasks [51, 50, 74, 48, 2, 17].
Recently, a growing body of research has focused on model merging [9, 29, 31, 43, 28, 76]. One
application of merging involves combining multiple task-specific models into a single multitask
1Our code is available at https://github.com/prateeky2806/ties-merging
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2306.01708v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jun 2023