Task Vectors  Trimmed Task Vectors  
(1) Trim
(2) Elect Sign
Aligned Values
Sign Vector 
Merged Task
Vector 
(3) Disjoint Merge
: Influential values
: Redundant values
: Parameter : Model 1
: Model 2
: Model 3
: Merged Model
Figure 1: A depiction of the steps involved in TIES -M ERGING . We visualize each parameter in
a model as a square. The arrows depict the update (task vector, τ) to a parameter produced by
fine-tuning on different tasks (coded by colors), with direction denoting sign and length denoting
magnitude. We first trim the task vector values based on their magnitude, then we elect the sign for
each parameter (γm, green vector containing +1 or −1) by resolving sign conflicts. Finally, we pick
only the values that align with the elected sign and take their mean as the final parameter value.
model without performing additional training. Previous works merge models by summing the
individual model weights with different weighting schemes, either via a simple average [ 9, 28, 77],
via more sophisticated means that incorporate parameter importance [43] or account for permutation
invariances [1, 31, 66, 69, 40]. Combining fine-tuned models in this way can be seen as adding
together task vectors [29] that are computed by subtracting the pre-trained model’s parameter values
from those of the fine-tuned model.
Original Values
 No Interference Redundant  Sign Conflict
 Mean TIES
Merged Values
Model 1 Model 2
Figure 2: Different types of conflict and
merged outputs produced by either averaging
or TIES -MERGING . The parameters causing
interference are denoted by dotted arrows.
While weighted averaging of model parameters has
proven effective for merging, all of these methods
ignore the possibility that values may interfere across
models, thereby harming the performance of the
merged model. In this paper, we first demonstrate
that interference can stem from two major causes
(see Fig. 2), both of which can reduce parameter
magnitudes in the merged model and eliminate sub-
tle distinctions among values: (1) INTERFERENCE
FROM REDUNDANT PARAMETERS : Previous studies
on model pruning [ 25, 71] have shown that during
the fine-tuning process, many model parameters can
change over the course of fine-tuning [59] but only
have a small impact on performance. However, when
merging a parameter that is influential for one model
but redundant (i.e. not influential) for other models,
the influential value may be obscured by the redun-
dant values, lowering the overall model performance
(# in Fig. 2). (2) INTERFERENCE FROM SIGN DISAGREEMENT : A given parameter might have a
positive value for some models and a negative value for others. Consequently, employing simple
averaging might compromise the performance on both tasks ( 7 in Fig. 2). In both of these situa-
tions, simply aggregating the values lead to interference that shrinks the parameter’s value in the
merged model. This interference between influential parameters might explain why the performance
gap between the merged model and multitask-trained model increases as the number of models
increases [31].
To address these sources of interference, we propose TIES -M ERGING (TRIM, E LECT SIGN &
MERGE ) method, a method for merging models by combining task vectors that has three steps
(visualized in Fig. 1): First, we trim each task vector to retain only the influential parameter values
by setting the redundant values in each task vector to zero (or, equivalently, resetting the fine-tuned
parameter value back to the value from the pre-trained model). After this step, sign conflicts may still
2