0 20 40 60 80 100
55
60
65
70
75
Keeping Top-K% Parameters
Average Perf.
Figure 3: Performance depends on a small frac-
tion of high-magnitude parameters. For each
task vector, we keep only the top-k% parameters
according to their magnitude and plot the average
performance across eleven tasks. Keeping only
the top-20% of the parameter does not degrade
the performance.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Number of Models
Frac. of Params 
 with Conflict
Figure 4: Sign conflicts occur even after trim-
ming and increase with the number of models.
We plot the fraction of parameters that have a sign
conflict after trimming versus the number of mod-
els being merged.
method [41, 26]. In both cases, we denote the trainable parameters as θ, the initialization as θinit, and
the finetuned parameters as θft. In this paper, we assume access to finetuned model parameters θft
for multiple tasks and devise a method to merge the weights of these models into a single multitask
model proficient on both in-domain and out-of-domain datasets. We follow Ilharco et al. [29] and
perform merging with task vectors. Specifically, for a task t, the task-vector τt ∈ Rd is defined as
τt = θt
ft − θt
init. This operation allows us to focus on the changes that happen during the fine-tuning
phase of each task-specific model and is equivalent to computing a weighted average of the models’
weights with appropriate scaling.
Algorithm 1 TIES -M ERGING Procedure.
Input: Fine-tuned models {θt}n
t=1, Initialization θinit,
k, and λ.
Output: Merged Model θm
forall t in1, ..., n do
▷ Create task vectors.
τt = θt − θinit
▷ Step 1: Trim redundant parameters.
ˆτt ← keep_topk_reset_rest_to_zero(τt, k)
ˆγt ← sgn( ˆτt)
ˆµt ← | ˆτt|
end
▷ Step 2: Elect Final Signs.
γm = sgn(Pn
t=1 ˆτt)
▷ Step 3: Disjoint Merge.
forall p in1, ..., d do
Ap = {t ∈ [n] | ˆγp
t = γp
m}
τ p
m = 1
|Ap|
P
t∈Ap ˆτ p
t
end
▷ Obtain merged checkpoint
θm ← θinit + λ ∗ τm
return θm
Redundancies in Model Parameters.
First, we demonstrate that in a given task
vector, many values are redundant (denoted
by # in Fig. 2), and removing them does
not affect the performance of the task.
Specifically, Fig. 3 shows the average
performance across eleven task-specific
models when "trimming" each task vector
to retain only the top-k% largest-magnitude
values and resetting the rest to their initial
value (i.e. setting the corresponding value
in the task vector to 0). Fig. 3 shows the
average performance across varying values
of k, demonstrating that keeping only the
top-20% of values delivers comparable
results to retaining all parameters. For
additional details and the results on the
T5 model, please refer to Appendix B.3.
This shows that many parameter changes
introduced during fine-tuning are redundant.
Hence, disregarding those values during
merging could prevent interference with the
influential parameters without compromising
the task’s performance.
Disagreement between Parameter Signs: Different fine-tuned models might introduce opposing
changes to a parameter in their task vectors, causing interference due to conflicting signs (denoted
by 7 in Fig. 2). Fig. 4 presents an analysis of the frequency of sign conflicts when merging varying
numbers of models. We first trim the task vectors for eleven tasks by keeping only the top 20% of
influential parameters. Then, we plot the percentage of parameters that have a sign conflict as we
increase the number of models to be merged from 2 to 11. Notably, sign conflicts occur even when
merging only 2 models, and the likelihood of a sign conflict increases with the number of models
being merged. For additional details and the results on the T5 model, please refer to Appendix B.3.
4