of these methods only combine models trained on the same
task. In this paper, we take this line of work to its logical
extreme: merging differently initialized models trained on
completely separate tasks (see Fig. 2). While this is an in-
credibly challenging problem, we employ two simple strate-
gies to make it feasible.
First, we note that prior work focuses on permuting one
model to the other when merging them. This creates a 1-1
mapping between the two models, inherently assuming that
most features across them are redundant. Since this isn’t
necessarily the case for models trained on different tasks,
we cannot rely on permutation alone. Instead, we exploit
redundancy within each model as well. To do this, we gen-
eralize model merging to support “zipping” any combina-
tion of features within and across each model. We ﬁnd that
on some datasets, this alone improves accuracy by up to
20% vs. Git Re-basin [2] and an even stronger permutation
baseline that we implement.
Second, existing methods merge the entire network .
While this might work for extremely similar models trained
in the same setting, the features of models trained on dis-
joint tasks become increasingly less correlated over the
course of the network [31]. To solve this, we introducepar-
tial zipping, where we only “zip” up to a speciﬁed layer. Af-
terwards, we feed the merged model’s intermediate outputs
to the remaining unmerged layers of the original networks,
naturally creating a multi-head model. Depending on the
difﬁculty of each task, this can improve accuracy by over
15% while still keeping most of the layers merged.
Incorporating both of these strategies, we introduce
ZipIt! (Fig. 1), a general method for “zipping” together any
number of models trained on different tasks into a single
multitask model without additional training. By deriving a
general graph-based algorithm for merging and unmerging
(Sec. 4), we can zip models of the same architecture to-
gether, merge features within each model, and partially zip
them to create a multi-task model. We verify the effective-
ness of our approach by merging models trained on com-
pletely disjoint sets of CIFAR [32], and ImageNet [12] cate-
gories, as well as merging models trained on completely in-
dependent datasets, signiﬁcantly outperforming prior work
in the process (Sec. 5). Finally, we ablate and analyze our
method’s capabilities on these scenarios (Sec. 6).
2. Related Work
Model merging combines the weights of two or more
models into a single set of weights in a useful way. In this
work, we explicitly target models that have been trained on
disjoint tasks (Fig. 2), which differs from prior work.
Merging Finetuned Models. If two models are ﬁnetuned
from the same pretrained checkpoint, they often lie in the
same error basin [43]. Several works [25, 26, 55, 60] have
Figure 2: Our Setting. Prior work [59, 2, 27] focuses on
merging models from the same dataset with the same label
sets: e.g., merging two models both trained to classify dog
breeds. In this work, we remove that restriction and “zip”
models that can come from different datasets and have dif-
ferent label sets: e.g., merging a model that classiﬁes dog
breeds with one that classiﬁes bird species.
exploited this property to average together the weights of
a model while training. [51, 8, 20, 9, 4] use an “exponen-
tial moving average” of training checkpoints as a teacher for
self-supervised learning. Other works merge models initial-
ized from the same pretrained base, but that were ﬁne-tuned
independently, either by simply averaging their weights
[41, 59], permuting one model to the other [3, 61, 56], or
maximizing some objective [40]. Our setting differs, as we
do not assume the same initialization.
Merging Differently Initialized Models. Merging mod-
els with different initializations is a much more challenging
problem. Works in this space often rely onmode connectiv-
ity [17, 18, 14, 16], attempting to interpolate between mod-
els along a low loss path (e.g., [52, 50, 39]). The most popu-
lar approach follows the intuition, later formalized by [15],
that models permuted to the same loss basin can be merged
by averaging their wights. Most notably, Git Re-Basin [2]
permutes models locally, primarily by comparing the sim-
ilarity between their weights. REPAIR [27] improves the
accuracy of Git Re-Basin by instead computing the simi-
larity between their intermediate layer feature activations,
and adding several batch norms to the network. [45] ﬁnds
permutations using global rather than local optimization,
though the method doesn’t generalize well to modern ar-
chitectures. Some of these works (e.g., [50, 2, 39]) evaluate
on on a setting where each model sees varying numbers of
instances per class. And one concurrent work [45] evaluates
on a continual learning setting where models are given dis-
joint categories, but their method requires optimization and
does not support skip connections. As far as we are aware,
we present the ﬁrst general method to successfully merge
models trained on disjoint tasks without training.
3. Motivation
Our goal is to merge any models of the same architec-
ture together without additional training. Unlike prior work
2