Figure 4: ZipIt! merges models layer-wise by exploiting redundancy in their features. (a) Starting with completely disjoint
layers with weightsW A andW B from models trained on different tasks, (b) we match redundant features by comparing their
activationsf A andf B. (c) We use this matching to produce a merge matrix M to combine f A andf B into a single shared
feature space f ∗ and a corresponding unmerge matrix U that undoes this operation. (d) In order to align the input space of
the next layer, we propagate U forward along network and at the same time receive a U matrix from the previous layer. (e)
Once we have both an M for the output, and a U for the input, we can “zip” the layers together by applying Eq. 7. (f) The
result is a single layer with a shared input and output space, and we can now repeat from (a) on the next layer.
some redundant features in f A
i andf B
i . That is, some ele-
ments of the two feature vectors are highly correlated over
a sample of data. In this work, we consider correlations be-
tween features within the same model and across the two
models. In practice we concatenate the two feature vec-
tors intof A
i∥f B
i ∈ R2ni and consider correlations between
each pair of elements in this concatenated vector, which dif-
fers from prior work [2, 27] that only consider correlations
across the two models.
If two features are highly correlated, then we can average
them without losing much information. Thus, if we can ﬁnd
a good pairing for each element of the concatenatedf A
i∥f B
i
(leaving us with ni pairs), we can construct a merged fea-
turef ∗
i that contains an efﬁciently compressed representa-
tion of f A
i and f B
i by averaging each pair of features. In
practice, we deﬁne a merge matrixMi∈ Rni×2ni s.t.
f ∗
i =Mi
(
f A
i∥f B
i
)
(4)
The resulting Mi is zero everywhere except for each pair
with indexp of matches (j,k ),Mi[p,j] =Mi[p,k] = 1/2. We
ﬁnd these matches greedily—an optimal algorithm exists
but is very slow and only slightly more accurate (Tab. 4).
What about the next layer? When computing matches in
the following layer, we now have the problem that the next
layers,LA
i+1,L B
i+1, are not compatible with this merged rep-
resentation. Instead, we need to undo the merge operation
before passing the features to the next layer. Thus, we need
to deﬁne an “unmerge” matrix Ui∈ R2ni×ni s.t.
Uif ∗
i ≈f A
i∥f B
i (5)
In the case of the matching from earlier,Ui is simply 2MiT
and has the effect of “copying” the merged features back to
their original locations. Note that in most cases, we can’t
have a strict equality here becauseUi isn’t full rank.
We can further split this unmerge matrix intoU A
i ,U B
i ∈
Rni×ni that act individually to producef A
i andf B
i by split-
tingUi in half along its rows. With this, we can evaluate the
next layers using the merged features:
f A
i+1 =LA
i+1(U A
i f ∗
i ) f B
i+1 =LB
i+1(U B
i f ∗
i ) (6)
4.1. The “Zip” Operation
We now have all the necessary pieces, and can derive a
general operation to mergeLA
i andLB
i at an arbitrary point
in the network (Fig. 4). First, we compute Mi and Ui by
matching features between f A
i and f B
i . We then pass Ui
to the next layer and receive Ui−1 from the previous layer.
UsingMi andUi−1, we can now “fuse” the merge and un-
merge operations into the layer’s parameters. For a linear
layer:
W ∗
i =M A
i W A
i U A
i−1 +M B
i W B
i U B
i−1 (7)
whereM A
i andM B
i areMi split in half along its columns.
The equation forb∗
i is similar but without the unmerge.
Note the similarity between Eq. 7 and Eq. 2. This isn’t a
coincidence: if we only allowed mergingacross models and
not within models, our “zip” operation would be identical to
Git Re-Basin’s permute-then-average approach. Thus, Eq. 7
can be thought of as a generalization of prior work.
4