Figure 5: Zip Propagation. In practice, we compute Mi
and Ui after activations (e.g., ReLU). Since we can’t ap-
ply Eq. 7 to a layer without a weight matrix, we have to
propagateMi backward until we hit such a layer, merging
element-wise layers (e.g., BatchNorm) along the way.
4.2. Zip Propagation
However, most modern neural networks are not simply
collections of linear layers stacked on top of each other. In
practice, we cannot combine merge and unmerge matrices
into every layer of the network, as a local zip (Eq. 7) expects
the layer to have a weightmatrix—i.e., the layer has to have
separate input and output spaces so that we can unmerge the
input space and merge the output space. Other layers (e.g.,
BatchNorm, ReLU) don’t have such a weight matrix.
Thus, we “propogate” Mi and Ui through these layers.
For instance, in Fig. 5, we show a common stack of layers
found in a typical ConvNet. Following [27], we compute
Mi and Ui using the activations of the network (i.e., after
each ReLU). We can’t fuse Mi with the ReLU layer, as it
doesn’t have any parameters. Similarly, we can merge the
parameters of the preceding BatchNorm layer (i.e., in the
same way as bias). But it doesn’t have a weight matrix, so
we also can’t fuseMi into it. Only once we’ve reached the
Conv layer can we fuse Mi and Ui into it using Eq. 7 (in
this case, treating each kernel element as independent).
Similar care needs to be taken with skip connections, as
every layer that takes input from or outputs to a skip connec-
tion shares the same feature space. However, this too can be
dealt with during propagation—we just need to propagate
Mi backward and Ui forward to each layer connected by
the same skip connection. In general, we can deﬁne propa-
gation rules to handle many different types of network mod-
ules (see Appendix B).
4.3. Extensions
Partial Zip. In many cases, we don’t want to zip every layer
of the two networks, especially if their output spaces are
incompatible, or if doing so would lose too much accuracy.
In those cases, we can perform a partial zip. That is, we zip
most of the layers together, but leave some of the later ones
unzipped (Fig. 6).
Implementing this operation is simple in our framework:
zip as normal until the speciﬁed layeri, then the remaining
Figure 6: Partial Zip. If we stop zipping early (a), we can
create a multi-head model that can perform multiple tasks.
All we need to do is apply the last unmerge from zip pro-
pogation (Fig. 5) to the inputs of the ﬁrst unmerged layer in
each model (b), and we get a model with multiple heads (c).
unzipped layers will receiveUi through zip propagation. If
we apply U A
i toLA
i+1 andU B
i toLB
i+1, the remaining un-
zipped layers will form “heads” that expect merged features
as input. We can then ensemble the heads or choose one to
evaluate at runtime.
Repeated Matching (α). In some cases, we’d like to merge
more than two models together. To do this, we allow “re-
peated matches”. That is, when two features are matched in
our greedy algorithm, they are removed and replaced with
the resulting merged feature. To ensure that one feature
doesn’t get merged endlessly, we set the correlations of the
new feature to be the minimum of the old features’ similar-
ities weighted by α∈ (0, 1]. We ﬁnd a small value of α
typically works best.
Same-model Budget (β). To demonstrate the effectiveness
of same-model merges, we introduce a “budget” parameter
β ∈ [0, 1] that denotes what percent of total merged fea-
tures can come from models merging within themselves,
with each model receiving an equal portion of this budget.
Note that a budget of 0 results in Eq. 2, as in that case no
features can be merged within models.
5. Results
We devise two types of experiments to benchmark dis-
joint task model merging (Fig. 2): (1) Merging models
trained on disjoint category splits of the same dataset (i.e.,
same dataset and different label sets), and (2) merging mod-
els trained on completely different datasets (i.e., different
datasets and label sets).
Experimental Details. For each experiment where we sam-
ple multiple disjoint splits of categories, we hold one split
out for hyperparameter search and report mean and standard
deviation on the rest. For experiments with models trained
on different datasets, we subsample the validation set into
a validation and test set to use for the same purpose. To
compute activations, we use a portion of the training set for
each dataset (see Appendix A). For a fair comparison, we
reset the batch norms forall methods (including the original
models) using the training data (following the recommenda-
5