[59, 2, 27], we speciﬁcally target the extremely difﬁcult
setting of models that have different initializations and are
trained on completely different tasks. In this section, we
will motivate the need for a new approach by showing how
prior work fails on this challenging setting.
What constitutes a task? The term “task” is often over-
loaded in machine learning. The broader vision community
treats “tasks” as different problem statements (e.g., detec-
tion vs. segmentation [38]), while subﬁelds like continual
learning [10] deﬁne “tasks” as disjoint category splits of the
same data. While we would ideally support any deﬁnition,
we speciﬁcally focus on classiﬁcation in this work. We de-
ﬁne tasks as either disjoint category splits of the same data
or as classiﬁcation on different datasets entirely.
3.1. Background
Consider a model L as a collection of layers Li ∈ L,
each of which may have some parameters (e.g.,Wi,b i for a
linear layer). We denote “merging” two modelsLA andLB
as combining their parameters into a new model L∗ such
thatL∗ retains the accuracy ofLA andLB on their original
tasks.
IfLA andLB are ﬁnetuned from the same checkpoint,
several works (e.g., [25, 26, 59]) have found that merging
them is as easy as averaging their weights. For instance, if
Li is a linear layer, the new weight matrixW ∗
i is simply
W ∗
i = 1
2W A
i + 1
2W B
i (1)
However, if LA andLB were not ﬁnetuned from the
same checkpoint, Eq. 1 typically results in random accu-
racy. To ﬁx this, a line of work (most recently [2, 27])
has found that if you ﬁrst permute the feature space of one
model to align with the feature space of the other model be-
fore averaging them together, you can recover much of the
lost accuracy. More concretely, letPi be a permutation ma-
trix that permutes the output of layerLB
i to the space ofLA
i .
Then for each layer, works such as Git Re-Basin [2] apply
W ∗
i = 1
2W A
i + 1
2PiW B
i P T
i−1 (2)
Note that here we permute the output space ofW B
i , but we
also need to permute its input space to undo the permutation
from the previous layer (hence the use ofP T
i−1).
Problems with Permutation. While Eq. 2 works decently
well for models trained on the same task, its underlying as-
sumptions break down when the models are trained on dif-
ferent tasks. The idea of permutation-based model merg-
ing (e.g. Git Re-Basin [2]) stems from mode connectivity
[15], where it has been conjectured that models with differ-
ent initializations trained on the same data lie in the same
loss basin (i.e., region of low loss or high accuracy) mod-
ulo permutation (as most neural networks can be permuted
Figure 3: Prior Work Fails on merging models trained on
different tasks. Git Re-Basin [2] assumes the two models lie
in same loss basin modulo permutation and interpolates be-
tween them. However, that is not sufﬁcient when the models
are trained on different tasks, here shown for disjoint class
sets of CIFAR-100. While A and the permuted B lie in simi-
lar basins, Git Re-Basin’s interpolation performsworse than
the originals. In contrast, our ZipIt! merges them into an
even better model in a completely different loss basin.
internally without affecting their outputs). As we show in
Fig. 3, this does not hold in our setting where the two mod-
els are trained on different tasks. In this case, Model B’s
optimal permutation lies in a similar yet distinct basin to
Model A. Because the two models are actually in different
basins, the interpolated result actually has a lower accuracy
than either of the two original models. This motivates us to
explore alternative methods for merging.
4. ZipIt!
In this work, we treat model merging as jointly com-
bining the checkpoints (i.e., collection of weights) of two
models into a single checkpoint that can perform all the
tasks of its constituents. We accomplish this by merging
each layer of one model with the corresponding layer in
the other, while modifying both (in contrast to permutation-
based merging, which only permutes one of the models).
For instance, if layer Li ∈ Lis a linear layer, it has
parameters Wi∈ Rni×mi,b i∈ Rni and takes input x∈
Rmi, with an output feature vectorfi∈ Rni where
fi =Li(x) = Wix +bi (3)
Then our goal is to take LA
i ∈ LA from model A and
LB
i ∈ LB from model B and merge them into a layer
L∗
i that combines their feature spaces such that informa-
tion from both f A
i andf B
i is retained in f ∗
i . Note that we
consider activation and normalization to be distinct layers
in the network as they are implemented in practice, rather
than one combined unit.
How do we “combine” feature spaces? In order to con-
struct the combined features f ∗
i , we assume that there are
3