Source: publisher DOI10.3934/era.2026074
PDF SHA256:27625dd8144a1b56a00c56060ee0673ffae710d04d931feb3a168435ffbc581c
Scope: PDF5–11 method continuation/sections3.1.2–3.1.5/Algorithm1; PDF13 section4.3 opening architecture/training protocol only. No numerical results adopted.

===PDFPAGE5===
1630
important graph structural information, a ffecting the model’s understanding of global and local
relationships in the graph. The strategy of discarding edges excessively may lead to graph
fragmentation and limit information transmission between nodes. Meanwhile, discarding key node
features separately may lead to random dropout, resulting in the model being unable to fully utilize
important features. Simply discarding features cannot utilize the topological structure of the graph,
which can affect the overall performance.
To address these issues, we propose a novel graph augmentation strategy that relieves these
drawbacks and simultaneously possesses the advantages of discarding edges and node features.
In GCL with adaptive augmentation (GCA) [33], node centrality is determined using metrics that
assess the similarity between nodes. Specifically, the cosine similarity between the feature vectors
of nodes u and v to quantify their similarity. This similarity measure is based directly on the nodes’
feature vectors and can be expressed as follows [33]:
Cos uv = Xu · Xv
||Xu|| · ||Xv|| , (3.1)
where Cos uv represents the cosine similarity metric, which quantifies the degree of similarity between
the feature vectors Xu and Xv.
Notably, SGCL [13] introduces a centrality measure of an edge connecting a pair of nodes, which
is mathematically formulated as [13]:
ϕ(u, v) =

Deg(u) + ncn(uv), i f Cosuv>R,
0.001, otherwise, (3.2)
where Deg(u) serves as the degree of node u, ncn(uv) represents the count of shared adjacent vertices
for any two given nodes in a network, normalized by their individual degrees,R = β + 1
Deg(u)+1, and the
hyperparameter β ∈ (0, 1) is a smoothing factor.
GCA introduces Muv = log ϕ(u, v) to alleviate the dominance of high-degree nodes in the learning
process. Inspired by GCA, we propose the edge drop probability, which is defined as:
Ped = min( Mmax − Muv
Mmax − µ1
· Pe, Pτ), (3.3)
where Mmax and µ1 respectively serve as the maximum and average value ofMuv, Pe is the overall edge
removal probability, andPτ denotes a threshold probability designed to prevent excessive disruption of
the graph structure.
Accordingly, the centrality score for each node is calculated based on the following formula:
ϕ(u) =
P
k∈ζ(u) ϕ(u, k)
Deg(u) , (3.4)
where Deg(u) denotes the count of adjacent nodes connected to vertexu, ζ(u) is the set of neighbors of
node u, and ϕ(u) denotes the node centrality measure designed to quantify node importance.
Similar to edge drop probability, node feature probability can be calculated as follows:
Pn f = min( Mmax − M f
Mmax − µ2
· P f , Pτ), (3.5)
Electronic Research Archive V olume 34, Issue 3, 1626–1652.

===PDFPAGE6===
1631
where M f = log P
u∈V Xu · ϕ(u), and Mmax and µ2 respectively represent both the maximum and the
average values of M f .
At last, according to Eqs (3.3)–(3.5), we leverage the calculated edge drop probabilityPed and node
feature probability Pn f to selectively and strategically discard edges and node features. In this way, the
model can be more robust during the training process.
It is worth noting that we employ a new diffusion graph as our third augmented view. The diffusion
mechanism has been widely applied in various fields. Learning degradation representations in
diffusion models (LLDi ffusion) [34] employs a di ffusion mechanism to specify a degradation
representation, where it learns the process of reversing degradation through a di ffusion model for
low-light image enhancement. All-in-oneweather-degraded image restoration (ADSM) [35] integrates
the acquired degradation aware prompts into the temporal embedding of the di ffusion model to
improve degradation perception. Zhang et al. [36] provides a comprehensive and timely overview of
recently published deep learning-based image deblurring methods, and suggests applying di ffusion
models to deblurring methods as a future direction. To construct the di ffusion graph, we first add
self-loops and apply symmetric normalization starting from the original adjacency matrix. We then
apply a di ffusion transform based on the personalized pagerank (PPR) kernel [37], which models a
random walk with restart to aggregate multi-hop neighborhood information. This approach captures
high-order structural dependencies by propagating information through multi-hop neighborhoods.
Specifically, the process of constructing the di ffusion graph structure can be formulated as
follows [37]:
QPPR = η(IN − (1 − η) ˜D− 1
2 ˜A ˜D− 1
2 )−1, (3.6)
where η is the teleport probability in a random walk, which controls the balance between local and
global structural information, and IN is a size-corresponding identity matrix.
The diffusion-based graph, as the third augmented view in our model, serves as a semantic guidance
view, providing a stable reference for representation learning. By encoding the di ffusion graph, the
teaching network generates node representations with consistent semantics. These representations
act as intermediate anchors, guiding the alignment between the two augmented views ( G1 and G2)
processed by the student network. This design helps alleviate the structural and semantic inconsistency
issues brought about by random graph augmentation.
Furthermore, the inherent relationship among the various augmented views lies in the fact that they
all stem from the original graph. Each graph focuses on di fferent information that can be extracted, in
a comprehensive and hierarchical manner.
3.1.2. Teacher-student teaching network
Based on previous research, we propose a novel teaching network to perceive local structural
differences and global topological smoothness. It establishes multi-level contrastive objectives,
ensuring rich and detailed supervision for graph encoders. The overall architecture of STGCN is
illustrated in Figure 1.
The teaching network, highlighted in the middle, forms the core of our framework. This network
comprises three graph encoders: two GNN-based student encoders and one GNN-based teacher
encoder. Each encoder processes node representations from the original graph and its augmented
Electronic Research Archive V olume 34, Issue 3, 1626–1652.

===PDFPAGE7===
1632
views, expressed as Z1 = fg(X1, A), Z2 = fg(X, A2), and Z0 = fg(X, A0). The primary innovation lies in
its parameter update mechanism, which is governed by the interaction between teacher and student
networks. The teacher encoder’s parameters are not updated via gradients but rather through
exponential moving average (EMA) [11] derived from the student networks. In the context of
curriculum learning, we compare the original graph to textbooks. The teacher encoder distributes the
textbook to student encoders and conducts teaching. After teaching guidance, the teacher encoder will
be improved based on the performance of the student encoders. As shown in Figure 2, this guided
update mechanism ensures that the teacher continuously refines its knowledge representation as the
students improve, fostering a mutually supervised and iterative learning process. It maintains stability
and provides a reference vector that enables smooth updates and reduces the fluctuation in the loss
caused by node inconsistency between different views.
G=(X, A)
G1=(X1, A)
G2=(X, A2)
Teaching EncoderAugmentation
Shared
Maximization
Maximization
Sampling
Z1 Y1
Z2 Y2
Prediction
    Label
Prediction
    Label
LSL
Pre1
Pre2
Training Loss
Z0
Teacher
GNNs
Student
GNNs
Student
GNNs
Updating
Updating
G0=(X, A0)
Diffusion mixing
constractive loss
stop gradient
Sampling
Random
sampling
mixing 
module
Figure 1. The proposed architecture of STGCN. Consider a graph G characterized by its
node attribute matrix X, adjacency matrix A, and the corresponding node labels Y. We
generate a pair of distinct augmented viewsG1 and G2. Both augmented views are processed
by a shared encoder, while the original graph is passed through a separate GNN encoder. Two
shared GNN encoders are used as students, and the other GNN encoder is used as a teacher,
forming a novel teaching network together. Then, we obtain three node-level representations
Z1, Z2, and Z0, and STGCN evaluates the di fference between the prediction labels by using
cross-entropy loss (LS L).
Given the variability in the number of neighbors for graph nodes, GNNs are particularly
appropriate for this task as they aggregate neighborhood information to capture structural features; the
GNN encoder such as GCN [14], GAT [15], GraphSAGE [16], How powerful are graph neural
Electronic Research Archive V olume 34, Issue 3, 1626–1652.

===PDFPAGE8===
1633
networks (GIN) [38], and Modularity-based siamese simple GCN (MS-SGC) [39] can be integrated
into our framework. Meanwhile, the original graph undergoes encoding via a GNN to produce
lower-dimensional node representations, denoted as fg ∈ RN×D. The original graph representation is
Z0 = fg(X0, A0). Projector network typically refers to a network structure used in deep learning
models to map high-dimensional features to a low-dimensional space. It is mainly used for
dimensionality reduction and feature projection, helping the model learn more concise representations
in a smaller feature space. Inspired by BGRL [10], we find that omitting the projector network not
only simplifies the architecture but also maintains or even enhances performance, and our framework
eliminates the projector network. Additionally, labeled nodes in our framework play a critical role in
preventing the collapse of representations, ensuring effective learning.
G2
G1
G0
teacher
student
student
  EMA 
updating
  EMA 
updating
   Stop 
Gradient
Z1
Z0
Z2
ZC
Maximize              
mutual 
information
Maximize              
mutual 
information
contrast
Figure 2. Simplified architecture of the proposed framework with three graph views.
3.1.3. Multi-view maximum mutual information
This section presents a set of contrastive loss functions based on the teaching network, designed
to measure the mutual information between three views: original view Z0 and its augmented views Z1
and Z2.
The node-level representations learned from the original view and its augmented views should
demonstrate high consistency. To achieve this goal, we employ a contrastive loss function based on
the normalized temperature-scaled cross-entropy loss [40]. This loss function encourages the
node-level representations of the original view and its augmented views to be similar while pushing
apart the representations of augmented views from other views in the mini-batch. For instance, in the
mini-batch, taking the ith graph Gi and its first augmented view T1 (Gi) as an example, the specific
formula of contrastive loss function is as follows:
L1 = − 1
N
NX
i=1
log exp(sim(Z0
i , Z1
i )/ξ)
PN
j=1 exp(sim(Z0
i , Z1
j )/ξ)
, (3.7)
where N is the number of original graphs in a mini-batch, ξ is the temperature hyperparameter, and
sim(Z0
i , Z1
i ) = (Z0
i )T · Z1
i /(||Z0
i || · ||Z1
i ||) is the cosine similarity function.
For graph Gi and its second augmented view T2(Gi), we derive a contrastive loss function aimed at
Electronic Research Archive V olume 34, Issue 3, 1626–1652.

===PDFPAGE9===
1634
maximizing mutual information between these two graphs, expressed as follows:
L2 = − 1
N
NX
i=1
log exp(sim(Z0
i , Z2
i )/ξ)
PN
j=1 exp(sim(Z0
i , Z2
j )/ξ)
. (3.8)
Finally, we can combine the above loss functions, and gain a new contrastive loss function of our
framework as follows:
LGL = αL1 + (1 − α)L2, (3.9)
where α is a non-negative tuning parameter.
The loss LGL encourages graph representations to maximize mutual information across augmented
views while maintaining sufficient discrimination among different views.
In Eq (3.9), it is expected that each augmented view maintains a positive relationship with the
original graph.
3.1.4. Random sampling mixing
Although the self-supervised loss function is e ffective, the node representations may fail to
distinguish between distinct classes due to the absence of label information. To overcome this
limitation, we propose a label propagation technique. Specifically, we demonstrate that it is possible
to organize unlabeled nodes into distinct groups corresponding to their classes by enforcing consistent
proximity to labeled nodes of the same class across di fferent augmented views. To achieve this goal,
we randomly select b labeled nodes (b is determined by the class with the fewest samples among all
classes) from each class to construct the randomly sampled support set S , and denote ZS as support
node representations. Then, by computing the similarity between the support set S of labeled nodes
and all nodes in the augmented views, we strengthen the alignment of class assignments through
similarity-based augmentation. The objective is to predict the class distribution, which is formally
defined as follows:
pre1
i =
X
(Z1p,Yp)∈ZS (i)
exp(sim(Z1
i , Z1
p)/τ) · Yp
P
k∈ZS (i) exp (sim(Z1
i , Z1
k )/τ) , (3.10)
pre2
i =
X
(Z2p,Yp)∈ZS (i)
exp(sim(Z2
i , Z2
p)/τ) · Yp
P
k∈ZS (i) exp (sim(Z2
i , Z2
k )/τ) , (3.11)
where sim(. , .) calculates the cosine similarity between two vectors,Z1
i is the learned representation for
the first view and similarly, Z2
i is the latent representation for the second view, prei can be considered
as the predicted class distributions for each node vi ∈ V, and τ denotes a temperature hyperparameter.
After calculating two predicted class distributions pre1
i and pre2
i , the supervised contrastive loss
function is defined:
LS L =
X
i∈V
H(pre1
i , pre2
i ), (3.12)
Electronic Research Archive V olume 34, Issue 3, 1626–1652.

===PDFPAGE10===
1635
where, H denotes the cross-entropy between two distinct distributions pre1
i and pre2
i for each node
vi ∈ V.
In addition, there is another issue worth discussing: The contrastive information learned in each
round is only utilized once. To better leverage underutilized information from di fferent perspectives,
we employ a random sampling mixing module to create new samples to fill in the gaps and actively
participate in the contrastive framework. The presence of filling-gap samples allows for the reemphasis
of information that has been underexplored from various perspectives. Based on the previously defined
randomly sampled support set S , we extract anchor support set representation ZA from G1 and positive
sample support set representation ZB from G2. ∀βi ∼ U(0, 1), where U denotes a uniform distribution,
and we can generate a new mixing node representation ZC
i based on the corresponding nodes ZA
i and
ZB
i . This process can be described as:
ZC
i = βi · ZA
i + (1 − βi) · ZB
i . (3.13)
This process involves generating a mixed representation based on the embedding of node i. Upon the
completion of mixed representation generation for all nodes, a new graph view, ZC
i , is generated. This
procedure can be repeated to generate multiple views as required to facilitate the presentation of our
model, but we only generate one ZC
i to mine underutilized information. Then, we extract the original
representation ZD
i from the original graph on the basis of support set S . To capture the consistency
between the filling-gap and original views, the contrastive loss function is defined as:
LCD =
NX
i=1
− log exp(sim(ZC
i , ZD
i ))
PN
j=1 exp(sim(ZC
i , ZD
j ))
. (3.14)
It is important to note that ZD
i serves as a fixed teacher embedding: Its parameters are not updated
through this loss function, and it does not act as a learnable anchor or negative sample. In this way,ZC
i is
encouraged to align with the stable diffusion-based semantics, while still incorporating complementary
information from multiple augmented views.
At last, the loss function of this supervised graph contrastive learning can be described as:
LS C = (LS L + LCD)/2. (3.15)
The supervised graph contrastive loss LS C integrates two complementary objectives, the supervised
label-consistent contrastive loss and the filling-gap consistency loss. It balances semantic consistency,
representation smoothness, and cross-view robustness, leading to more reliable node representations
under limited supervision.
3.1.5. Node-based consistency regularization
In our framework, we utilize a GCL strategy to improve node consistency under di fferent graph
views. By comparing the contrastive loss functions, we ensure that the embeddings of each node
remain consistent across these perspectives while remaining distinguishable from the embeddings of
other nodes. To learn node representations, we minimize the cosine distance of the same node in two
augmented views to ensure the robustness and consistency of node representations. The corresponding
formulation is as follows:
LNC = − 1
N
NX
i=1
Z1
i · Z2
i
||Z1
i || · ||Z2
i ||, (3.16)
Electronic Research Archive V olume 34, Issue 3, 1626–1652.

===PDFPAGE11===
1636
where, Z1
i and Z2
i denote the representations corresponding to the first and second views.
The loss LNC is designed to enforce node-level representation consistency across di fferent
augmented graph views. Unlike pairwise contrastive objectives that rely on negative samples, LNC
focuses solely on positive pairs of the same node, which simplifies optimization and avoids potential
instability caused by negative sampling.
Notably, the aforementioned loss function di ffers from that of BGRL [10]. In BGRL, two
independent encoders are employed: One is updated by minimizing the semantic inconsistency
between node representations across di fferent augmented views, while the other employs an EMA to
adjust its parameters, preventing the node representations from collapsing into trivial solutions. In
contrast, our approach utilizes one shared encoder and introduces monitoring signals within the
framework to ensure that node representations do not converge to overly simplistic solutions.
Finally, we formulate the overall loss of our framework by combining several distinct loss terms
LGL, LS C, and LNC, each with respective coe fficients λ1, λ2, and λ3. Additionally, we add the cross-
entropy loss function Lsup, which is defined over a set of labeled nodes. So, the final objective loss
function is as follows:
LTraining = Lsup + λ1LGL + λ2LS C + λ3LNC. (3.17)
The overall pipeline of STGCN shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 The learning process of STGCN.
Require: Feature matrix X; Adjacency matrix A; True label Y; Maximum number of iterations T;
Encoder fg by random initialization.
1: While not reaching T do
2: Generate augmented view G1 = (X1, A), mask node features and drop partial edges based on
edge centrality.
3: Generate augmented view G2 = (X, A2), mask node features and drop partial edges based on
edge centrality.
4: Generate diffusion graph G0 = (X, A0) based on PPR kernel.
5: Get node embeddings through GNNs as encoder: Z1 = fg(X1, A), Z2 = fg(X, A2), Z0 = fg(X, A0).
6: Calculate model predictions as pre1 = p(Y|Z1) and pre2 = p(Y|Z2).
7: Calculate graph contrastive loss LGL based on Eq.(9).
8: Calculate graph contrastive loss LS C based on Eq.(15).
9: Calculate graph contrastive loss LNC based on Eq.(16).
10: Calculate cross-entropy loss Lsup .
11: Update g, m by gradient descent according to the overall loss function LTraining in Eq.(17).
12: end while
13: return model fg.


===PDFPAGE13:SECTION4.3OPENING_ONLY===
1638
4.3. Experimental settings and parameter study
To evaluate the performance of the proposed STGCN framework on node classification under
limited label scenarios, we conduct experiments using 20 random data splits and report the average
results across these splits for each dataset, and the average performance across these splits is reported
for each dataset. Specifically, on the Cora and CiteSeer datasets, we use training label rates of 0.50%,
1.00%, and 2.00%, and for PubMed, the training sizes are set to 0.03%, 0.06%, and 0.10%. In the
co-purchase datasets, we evaluate the framework using label rates of 0.15%, 0.20%, and 0.25%.
Our STGCN framework is implemented with a two-layer GCN architecture, each layer consisting
of [128, 128] units. The activation function used for all layers is PReLU, providing flexibility in
modeling non-linear relationships. For training, dropout with a rate of 0.60 is applied on the CiteSeer,
Cora, and PubMed datasets to prevent overfitting. The model is trained for up to 1000 training
epochs, and the Adam optimizer [48] is used for gradient-based optimization. The training process
includes an early stopping mechanism, where training is halted if the validation accuracy fails to
improve for a specified number of epochs. This helps ensure that the model is not trained longer than
necessary. Then, the precision of the framework is validated through the evaluation on the testing
dataset, and the best performance is highlighted in bold.

