the FG% estimation. We view a player’s decision to shoot the ball as being completely within their
control and hence non-random. As such, we incorporate no uncertainty in the estimated surfaces.
We use the LGCP as a smoother for observed shots rather than as an estimate of a player’s true
latent FGA rate. Other smoothing methods (e.g. kernel based methods (Diggle 1985)) could be
used instead.
Depending on the player and lineup, a player’s shot attempt proﬁle can vary drastically from
lineup to lineup. Figure 4 shows Kyrie Irving’s estimated FGA rate surfaces in the starting lineup
(left) and the lineup in which he played the most minutes without LeBron James (middle). Based
on these two lineups, Irving took 9.2 more shots per 36 minutes when he didn’t share the court
with James. He also favored the left side of the court far more, which James tends to dominate
when on the court.
0.05
0.10
FGA    
Most minute Lineup w/ LeBron
Kyrie Irving FGA rate
0.02
0.04
0.06
FGA    
Most minute Lineup w/o LeBron
Kyrie Irving FGA rate
−0.025
0.000
0.025
0.050
Diff
Difference
Figure 4: Left: Kyrie Irving’s FGA rate per 36 minutes in the starting lineup (in which he shared the most
minutes with LeBron James). Center: Kyrie Irving’s FGA rate per 36 minutes in the lineup for which he
played the most minutes without LeBron James. Right: The diﬀerence of the center surface from the left
surface.
Clearly player shot attempt rates are not invariant to their teammates on the court. We
therefore restrict player FGA rate estimation to lineup-speciﬁc data. Fortunately, the additional
sparsity introduced by conditioning on lineup is a non-issue. If a player has no observed shot
attempts from a certain region (e.g, Tristan Thompson from 3-point range), this simply means
they chose not to shoot from that region—we don’t need to borrow strength from neighboring
players to shed light on this area of “incomplete data”.
3 Allocative Eﬃciency Metrics
The models for FG% and FGA rate described in Section 2 are the backbone of the allocative eﬃ-
ciency metrics we introduce in this section: lineup points lost (LPL) and player LPL contribution
(PLC). Before getting into the details, we emphasize that these metrics are agnostic to the underly-
ing FG% and FGA models; they can be implemented using even crude estimates of FG% and FGA
rate, for example, by dividing the court into discrete regions and using the empirical FG% and
FGA rate within each region. 3 Also note that the biases aﬀecting FG% and FGA rate described
3Section 6.1 in the appendix shows how LPL can be calculated using empirical estimates of FG% and FGA rate.
We use the Cavaliers starting lineup to compare these empirical LPL surfaces to the more sophisticated versions
presented in the main text.
9