1.1 Related Work
In recent years, a number of metrics have been developed which aim to measure shot eﬃciency, such
as true shooting percentage (Kubatko et al. 2007), qSQ, and qSI (Chang et al. 2014). Additionally,
metrics have been developed to quantify individual player eﬃciency, such as Hollinger’s player
eﬃciency rating (Sports Reference LLC n.d.). While these metrics intrinsically account for team
context, there have been relatively few studies which have looked at shooting decisions explicitly
in context of lineup, and none spatially.
Goldman & Rao (2011) coined the term ‘allocative eﬃciency’, modeling the decision to shoot
as a dynamic mixed-strategy equilibrium weighing both the continuation value of a possession and
the value of a teammate’s potential shot. They propose that a team achieves optimal allocative
eﬃciency when, at any given time, the lineup cannot reallocate the ball to increase productivity on
the margin. Essentially, they argue that lineups optimize over all dimensions of an oﬀensive strategy
to achieve equal marginal eﬃciency for every shot. The left plot of Figure 1 is harmonious with this
theory—there appears to be no relationship between player shooting frequency and player shooting
skill when viewed on the aggregate. However, one of the most important dimensions the players
optimize over is court location. Once we disaggregate the data by court location, (as shown in the
right plots of Figure 1), we see a clear relationship between shooting frequency and shooting skill.
A unique contribution of our work is a framework to assess this spatial component of allocative
eﬃciency.
Shot satisfaction (Cervone et al. 2016) is another rare example of a shot eﬃciency metric that
considers lineups. Shot satisfaction is deﬁned as the expected value of a possession conditional on
a shot attempt (accounting for various contextual features such as the shot location, shooter, and
defensive pressure at the time of the shot) minus the unconditional expected value of the play.
However, since shot satisfaction is marginalized over the allocative and spatial components, these
factors cannot be analyzed using this metric alone. Additionally, shot satisfaction is dependent on
proprietary data which limits its availability to a broad audience.
1.2 Data and Code
The data used for this project is publicly available from the NBA stats API (stats.nba.com). Shooter
information and shot (x, y) locations are available through the shotchartdetail’ API endpoint, while
lineup information can be constructed from the playbyplayv2’ endpoint. Code for constructing
lineup information from play-by-play data is available at: https://github.com/jwmortensen/
pbp2lineup. Using this code, we gathered a set of 224,567 shots taken by 433 players during the
2016-17 NBA regular season, which is the data used in this analysis. Code used to perform an
empirical version of the analysis presented in this paper is also available online: https://github.
com/nsandholtz/lpl.
4