Following Miller et al. (2014), the bases of shot taking behavior, Λ ΛΛ, are computed through
a combination of smoothing and non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) (Lee & Seung 1999).
Using integrated nested Laplace approximation (INLA) as the engine for our inference, we ﬁrst ﬁt
a log Gaussian Cox Process (LGCP) (Banerjee et al. 2015) independently to each player’s point
process deﬁned by the ( x, y) locations of their made shots using the aforementioned mesh. 2 Each
player’s estimated intensity function is evaluated at each vertex, producing a K-dimensional vector
for each of the L = 433 players in our data. These vectors are exponentiated and gathered (by
rows) into the L× K matrix P, which we then factorize via NMF:
P≈
(
B
L×D
)(
ΛΛΛ
D×K
)
. (3)
This yields ΛΛΛ, the deterministic bases we use in (2). While the bases from (3) are constructed
solely with respect to the spatial variation in the FGA data (i.e. no basketball-speciﬁc structures
are induced a priori), the constraint on the number of bases signiﬁcantly impacts the basis shapes.
In general, the NMF tends to ﬁrst generate bases according to shot distance. After accounting
for this primary source of variation, other systematic features of variation begin to appear in the
bases, notably asymmetry. We use D = 16 basis functions, aligning with Miller et al. (2014) which
suggests the optimal number of basis functions falls between 15 and 20. Collectively, these bases
comprise a comprehensive set of shooting tendencies, as shown in Figure 2. We have added labels
post hoc to provide contextual intuition.
Under Hoop
 Hoop Right
 Lower Paint
 Top of Key
 Right Baseline
 Right Corner 3
 Right Arc 3
 Center Arc 3
Hoop Front
 Hoop Left
 Upper Paint
 Elbow Jumpers
 Left Baseline
 Left Corner 3
 Left Arc 3
 Residual
Figure 2: Deterministic bases resulting from the non-negative matrix factorization of P. The plots are
arranged such that the bases closest to the hoop are on the left (e.g. Under Hoop) and the bases furthest from
the hoop are on the right (e.g. Center Arc 3). The residual basis, comprising court locations where shots are
infrequently attempted from, is shown in the bottom-right plot.
Conceptually, the Zj(s) term in (1) represents a player-speciﬁc spatial ‘correction’ to the global
regression model βββ′x. These player-speciﬁc surfaces are linear combinations of the bases shown in
2Players who took less than ﬁve shots in the regular season are treated as “replacement players.”
6