the corner 3-point regions, suggesting that Westbrook should be taking more shots from these areas.
However, anyone who watched the Thunder play that season will know that many of these corner
3-point opportunities were created by Westbrook driving to the basket, drawing extra defenders
toward him, then kicking the ball out to an open teammate in the corner. Obviously, Westbrook
cannot both drive to the rim and simultaneously pass to himself in another area of the court. In this
case, strictly minimizing LPL would reduce the number of these drive-and-kick plays, potentially
attenuating their oﬀensive ﬁrepower. Shot-creation is not accounted for by LPL and should be
carefully considered when exploring LPL and PLC.
There are game theoretic factors to be considered as well. Beyond the defensive elements
discussed in Section 4.1, rigid adherence to minimizing LPL could lead to a more predictable oﬀense
and thus make it easier to defend (D’Amour et al. 2015). Needless to say, oﬀensive game-planning
should be informed by more than LPL metrics alone.
5 Conclusion
Our research introduces novel methods to evaluate allocative eﬃciency spatially and shows that this
eﬃciency has a real impact on game outcomes. We use publicly available data and have made an
empirical demonstration of our methods available online, allowing our methods to be immediately
accessible. Also, since LPL and PLC do not depend on speciﬁc models for FG% and FGA rate,
LPL and PLC could readily be calculated at G-league, NCAA, and international levels using a
simpliﬁed model of FG% and FGA rate.
As most professional basketball teams have access to proprietary data, many of the contextual
variables that we do not account for could be included in the FG% and FGA rate models, which
could make the proposed shot distribution proposed by LPL a more reliable optimum to seek.
Additionally, by pairing LPL with play call data coaches could gain insight into the eﬃciency of
speciﬁc plays. Even without access to these data, it may be possible to recreate some contextual
features that aren’t explicitly provided by the NBA’s public-facing API. For instance, shot clock
times could be reverse engineered using game clock times given in the play-by-play data.
There are interesting academic questions that stem from this paper as well. Future studies
could investigate the sensitivity of our metrics to model parameters that we ﬁxed, such as the
number of basis functions in the NMF and the number of neighbors in the CAR prior. We could
also investigate the robustness of LPL to alternate FG% models. As mentioned previously, we
do not account for usage curves in our analysis. Doing so would turn LPL into a constrained
optimization problem, which would be a fascinating challenge to tackle. Also, using LPL to inform
player-speciﬁc shot policy changes, entire seasons could be simulated using the method in Sandholtz
& Bornn (2020) to quantify the impact of speciﬁc shot allocation changes on point production. We
hope that the methods introduced in this paper will be built upon and improved.
22