3-point shooter. On the other hand, the negative values for LeBron James in the mid-range region
suggest that he may be over-used in this area. We emphasize, however, that conclusions should
be made carefully. Though inequality between the FG% and FGA ranks may be indicative of sub-
optimal shot allocation, this interpretation may not hold in every situation due to bias introduced
by confounding variables (e.g. defensive pressure, shot clock, etc.).
3.2 Lineup Points Lost
By reducing the FG% and FGA estimates to ranks, we compromise the magnitude of player-to-
player diﬀerences within lineups. Here we introduce lineup points lost (LPL), which measures
deviation from perfect rank correspondence while retaining the magnitudes of player-to-player
diﬀerences in FG% and FGA.
LPL is deﬁned as the diﬀerence in expected points between a lineup’s actual distribution of FG
attempts, AAA, and a proposed redistribution, AAA∗, constructed to yield perfect rank correspondence
(i.e. RRRA∗
− RRRξ = 000). Formally, we calculate LPL in the ith cell as
LPLi =
5∑
j=1
vi· ξij·
(
Ai[g(Rξ
ij )]− Aij
)
(7)
=
5∑
j=1
vi· ξij·
(
A∗
ij− Aij
)
, (8)
where vi is the point value (2 or 3) of a made shot, ξij is the FG% for player j in cell i, Aij is
player j’s FG attempts (per 36 minutes) in cell i, and g(Rξ
ij) ={k : Rξ
ij≡ RA
ik}. The function g(·)
reallocates the observed shot attempt vector AAAi such that the best shooter always takes the most
shots, the second best shooter takes the second most shots, and so forth.
Figure 7 shows a toy example of how LPL is computed for an arbitrary 3-point region, con-
textualized via the Cleveland Cavaliers starting lineup. In this hypothetical scenario, James takes
the most shots despite both Love and Irving being better shooters from this court region. When
calculating LPL for this region, Irving is allocated James’ nine shots since he is the best shooter in
this area. Love, as the second best shooter, is allocated Irving’s four shots (which was the second
most shots taken across the lineup). James, as the third best shooter, is allocated the third most
shot attempts (which is Love’s three shots). Smith and Thompson’s shot allocations are unchanged
since their actual number of shots harmonizes with the distribution imposed by g(·). Each player’s
actual expected points and optimal expected points are calculated by multiplying their FG% by
the corresponding number of shots and the point-value of the shot (3 points in this case). LPL is
the diﬀerence (in expectation) between the optimal points and the actual points, which comes out
to 0.84.
12