6 Appendix
6.1 Empirical Implementation
To illustrate some important considerations associated with this approach, we present a brief ex-
ample of LPL and PLC using empirical FG% and FGA rates. This example demonstrates that
these quantities are agnostic to the underlying FG% model.
We examine the same lineup for the Cavaliers that is discussed in the main text. In order to
obtain FG% and FGA rate estimates, we divide the court into twelve discrete regions and calculate
the empirical values for each player within these regions. We deﬁned these regions based on our
understanding of the court, but it is worth noting that deﬁning these regions requires many of the
same considerations as with any histogram style estimator; namely, that increasing the number
of regions will decrease bias at the expense of increasing variance. In some cases, a player may
have only one or two shots within an area, resulting in either unrealistically high or low ﬁeld goal
percentage estimates. As an ad hoc solution to this, we give all players one made ﬁeld goal and
ﬁve ﬁeld goal attempts within each region, which means that players with just a handful of shots
in a region will have their associated ﬁeld goal percentage anchored near 20 percent. Rather than
perform smoothing for the ﬁeld goal attempt estimates, we simply count up the number of attempts
for each player within each section, and normalize them to get the attempts per 36 minutes, as
before. With these FG% and FGA estimates, we can replicate the analysis detailed in Section 3.
Figure 14 shows the empirical ranks for this lineup, as well as the rank correspondence. Gener-
ally, it shows the same patterns as the model-based analysis in Figures 5 and 6. However, there are
some key diﬀerences, including Tristan Thompson having a higher ﬁeld goal percentage rank from
the right midrange and a corresponding reduction in rank for Kevin Love in the same area. This
pattern is also manifest in Figure 15, which shows the empirical LPL. We observe that most lineup
points appear to be lost in the right midrange and in above the break three point shots. Finally,
considering the empirical PLC in Figure 15, we notice that in addition to the Love-Thompson
tradeoﬀ in the midrange, JR Smith appears to be overshooting from the perimeter, while Kyrie
Irving and LeBron James both exhibit undershooting.
The persistence of the Love-Thompson connection in the midrange in this empirical analysis,
and its divergence from what we saw in the model based analysis, merits a brief discussion. Kevin
Love and Tristan Thompson both had a low number of shots from the far-right midrange region,
with Love shooting 8 for 26 and Thompson shooting 4 for 6. Because they both shot such a low
amount of shots, even with the penalty of one make and four misses added to each region, Thompson
appears far better. This highlights the fact that although LPL and PLC are model agnostic, the
underlying estimates for ﬁeld goal percentage do matter and raw empirical estimates alone may be
too noisy to be useful in calculating LPL. One simple solution may be to use a threshold and only
consider players in a region if the number of their ﬁeld goal attempts passes that threshold.
23