in Section 2 may aﬀect the allocative eﬃciency metrics as well. Section 4 includes a discussion of
the causal limitations of the approach.
LPL is the output of a two-step process. First, we redistribute a lineup’s observed distribution
of shot attempts according to a proposed optimum. This optimum is based on ranking the ﬁve
players in the lineup with respect to their FG% and FGA rate and then redistributing the shot
attempts such that the FG% ranks and FGA rate ranks match. Second, we estimate how many
points could have been gained had a lineup’s collection of shot attempts been allocated according
to this alternate distribution. In this section, we go over each of these steps in detail and conclude
by describing PLC, which measures how individual players contribute to LPL.
3.1 Spatial Rankings Within a Lineup
With models for player FG% and player-lineup FGA rate, we can rank the players in a given lineup
(from 1 to 5) on these metrics at any spot on the court. For a given lineup, let RRRξ
i be a discrete
transformation of ξξξi—the lineup’s FG% vector in court cell i—yielding each player’s FG% rank
relative to their four teammates. Formally,
Rξ
ij ={(nξi + 1)− k : ξij≡ ξ(k)
i }, (5)
where nξi is the length of ξξξi, the vector being ranked (this length will always be 5 in our case),
and ξ(k)
i is the kth order statistic of ξξξi. Since ξij is a stochastic quantity governed by a posterior
distribution, Rξ
ij is also distributional, however its distribution is discrete, the support being the
integers{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. The distribution of Rξ
ij can be approximated by taking posterior samples of
ξξξi and ranking them via (5). Figure 16 in the appendix shows the 20% quantiles, medians, and
80% quantiles of the resulting transformed variates for the Cavaliers starting lineup.
We obtain ranks for FGA rates in the same manner as for FG%, except these will instead be
deterministic quantities since the FGA rate surfaces, AAA, are ﬁxed. We deﬁne RA
ij as
RA
ij ={(nAi + 1)− k : Aij≡ A(k)
i }, (6)
where nAi is the length of AAAi and A(k)
i is the kth order statistic of AAAi. Figure 5 shows the estimated
maximum a posteriori 4 (MAP) FG% rank surfaces, ˆRRR
ξ
, and the deterministic FGA rate rank
surfaces, RRRA, for the Cleveland Cavaliers starting lineup.
4For the FG% rank surfaces we use the MAP estimate in order to ensure the estimates are always in the support of
the transformation (i.e. to ensure ˆRξ
ij ∈ { 1,..., 5}). For parameters with continuous support, such as ˆξξξ, the hat
symbol denotes the posterior mean.
10