identify areas of ineﬃciency that do not stand out due to low densities of shot attempts:
LPLShot
i = LPLi
∑5
j=1 Aij
. (9)
This formulation yields the average lineup points lost per shot from region i, as shown in the right
plot of Figure 8.
LPL incorporates an intentional constraint—for any court cell i, AAA∗
i is constrained to be a
permutation of AAAi. This ensures that no single player can be reallocated every shot that was taken
by the lineup (unless a single player took all of the shots from that region to begin with). It also
ensures that the total number of shots in the redistribution will always equal the observed number
of shots from that location
(
i.e. ∑5
j=1 Aij = ∑5
j=1 A∗
ij, for all i
)
.
Ultimately, LPL aims to quantify the points that could have been gained had a lineup adhered
to the shot allocation strategy deﬁned by AAA∗. However, as will be detailed in Section 4, there
is not a 1-to-1 relationship between ‘lineup points’ as deﬁned here, and actual points. In other
words, reducing the total LPL of a team’s lineup by 1 doesn’t necessarily correspond to a 1-point
gain in their actual score. In fact, we ﬁnd that a 1-point reduction in LPL corresponds to a
0.6-point gain (on average) in a team’s actual score. One reason for this discrepancy could be
because LPL is inﬂuenced by contextual variables that we are unable to account for in our FG%
model, such as the shot clock and defensive pressure. Another may be due to a tacit assumption
in our deﬁnition of LPL. By holding each player’s FG% constant despite changing their volume of
shots when redistributing the vector of FG attempts, we implicitly assume that a player’s FG%
is independent of their FGA rate. The basketball analytics community generally agrees that this
assumption does not hold—that the more shots a player is allocated, the less eﬃcient their shots
become. This concept, referred to as the ‘usage-curve’ or ‘skill-curve’, was introduced in Oliver
(2004) and has been further examined in Goldman & Rao (2011). Incorporating usage curves into
LPL could be a promising area of future work.
3.3 Player LPL Contribution
LPL summarizes information from all players in a lineup into a single surface, compromising our
ability to identify how each individual player contributes to LPL. Fortunately, we can parse out
each player’s contribution to LPL and distinguish between points lost due to undershooting and
points lost due to overshooting. We deﬁne player j’s LPL contribution (PLC) in court location i
as
PLCij = LPLi×
(
A∗
ij− Aij
∑5
j=1|A∗
ij− Aij|
)
, (10)
where all terms are as deﬁned in the previous section. The parenthetical term in (10) apportions
LPLi among the 5 players in the lineup proportional to the size of their individual contributions to
LPLi. Players who are reallocated more shots under AAA∗
i compared to their observed number of shot
14