Figure 2. The weights of these combinations, wj, are latent parameters which are jointly estimated
with βββ. Since these player weights can be highly sensitive for players with very little data, it
is imperative to introduce a regularization mechanism on them, which is accomplished using a
conditionally autoregressive (CAR) prior. Conveniently, the NMF in (3) provides player-speciﬁc
loadings onto these bases, B, which we use in constructing this CAR prior on the basis weights,
wj (Besag 1974). The purpose of using a CAR prior on the basis weights is to shrink the FG%
estimates of players with similar shooting characteristics toward each other. This is integral for
obtaining realistic FG% estimates in areas where a player took a low volume of shots. With only
a handful of shots from an area, a player’s empirical FG% can often be extreme (e.g. near 0% or
100%). The CAR prior helps to regularize these extremes by borrowing strength from the player’s
neighbors in the estimation.
In order to get some notion of shooting similarity between players, we calculate the Euclidean
distance between the player loadings contained in B and, for a given player, deﬁne the ﬁve players
with the closest player loadings as their neighbors. This is intentionally chosen to be fewer than the
number of neighbors selected by Cervone, recognizing that more neighbors deﬁnes a stronger prior
and limits player-to-player variation in the FG% surfaces. We enforce symmetry in the nearest-
neighbors relationship by assuming that if player j is a neighbor of player ℓ, then player ℓ is also
a neighbor of player j, which results in some players having more than ﬁve neighbors. These
relationships are encoded in a player adjacency matrix H where entry ( j, ℓ) is 1 if player ℓ is a
neighbor of player j and 0 otherwise. The CAR prior on wj can be speciﬁed as
(wj|w−(j), τ 2)∼N
(
1
nj
∑
ℓ:Hjℓ =1
wℓ, τ 2
nj
ID
)
(4)
τ 2∼ InvGam(1, 1).
where nj is the total number of neighbors for player j.
Lastly, we set aN (0, 0.001× I) prior on βββ, and ﬁt the model using INLA. This yields a model
that varies spatially and allows us to predict player-speciﬁc FG% at any location in the oﬀensive
half court. In order to get high resolution FG% estimates, we partition the court into 1 ft. by 1 ft.
grid cells (yielding a total of M = 2350 cells) and denote player j’s FG% at the centroid of grid cell
i as ξij. The projection of the FG% posterior mean ( ˆξξξj) for LeBron James is depicted in Figure 3.
In order to have suﬃcient data to reliably estimate these surfaces, we assume that player FG%s
are lineup independent. We recognize this assumption may be violated in some cases, as players who
draw signiﬁcant defensive attention can improve the FG%s of their teammates by providing them
with more unguarded shot opportunities. Additionally, without defensive information about the
shot opportunities, the FG% estimates are subject to systematic bias. Selection bias is introduced
by unequal amounts of defensive pressure applied to shooters of diﬀerent skill levels.
The Bayesian modeling framework can amplify selection bias as well. Since the FG% estimates
are regularized in our model via a CAR prior, players FG% estimates shrink toward their neighbors
(which we’ve deﬁned in terms of FGA rate). While this feature stabilizes estimates for players with
7