Measuring Spatial Allocative Eﬃciency in Basketball
Nathan Sandholtz, Jacob Mortensen, and Luke Bornn
Simon Fraser University
August 4, 2020
Abstract
Every shot in basketball has an opportunity cost; one player’s shot eliminates all potential
opportunities from their teammates for that play. For this reason, player-shot eﬃciency should
ultimately be considered relative to the lineup. This aspect of eﬃciency—the optimal way
to allocate shots within a lineup—is the focus of our paper. Allocative eﬃciency should be
considered in a spatial context since the distribution of shot attempts within a lineup is highly
dependent on court location. We propose a new metric for spatial allocative eﬃciency by
comparing a player’s ﬁeld goal percentage (FG%) to their ﬁeld goal attempt (FGA) rate in
context of both their four teammates on the court and the spatial distribution of their shots.
Leveraging publicly available data provided by the National Basketball Association (NBA), we
estimate player FG% at every location in the oﬀensive half court using a Bayesian hierarchical
model. Then, by ordering a lineup’s estimated FG%s and pairing these rankings with the
lineup’s empirical FGA rate rankings, we detect areas where the lineup exhibits ineﬃcient shot
allocation. Lastly, we analyze the impact that sub-optimal shot allocation has on a team’s
overall oﬀensive potential, demonstrating that ineﬃcient shot allocation correlates with reduced
scoring.
Keywords: Bayesian hierarchical model, spatial data, ranking, ordering, basketball
*The ﬁrst and second authors contributed equally to this work.
1 Introduction
From 2017 to 2019, the Oklahoma City Thunder faced four elimination games across three playoﬀ
series. In each of these games, Russell Westbrook attempted over 30 shots and had an average
usage rate of 45.5%.1 The game in which Westbrook took the most shots came in the ﬁrst round of
the 2017-18 National Basketball Association (NBA) playoﬀs, where he scored 46 points on 43 shot
attempts in a 96-91 loss to the Utah Jazz. At the time, many popular media ﬁgures conjectured
that having one player dominate ﬁeld goal attempts in this way would limit the Thunder’s success.
While scoring 46 points in a playoﬀ basketball game is an impressive feat for any one player, its
impact on the overall game score is moderated by the fact that it required 43 attempts. Perhaps
1Usage percentage is an estimate of the percentage of team plays used by a player while they were on the ﬂoor. For a
detailed formula see www.basketball-reference.com/about/glossary.html
1
arXiv:1912.05129v2  [stat.AP]  1 Aug 2020