attempts will have PLC ij > 0. Therefore, positive PLC values indicate potential undershooting
and negative values indicate potential overshooting. As in the case of LPL, if we divide PLC by
the sum of shot attempts in cell i, we obtain average PLC per shot from location i:
PLCShot
i = PLCi
∑5
j=1 Aij
. (11)
The PLCShot
i surfaces for the Cleveland Cavaliers’ 2016-17 starting lineup are shown in Figure
9. We see that Kyrie Irving is potentially being under-utilized from beyond the arc and that
LeBron James is potentially over-shooting from the top of the key, which is harmonious with our
observations from Figure 6. However, it is worth noting that the LPL per 36 plot (left plot in
Figure 8) shows very low LPL values from the mid-range region since the Cavaliers have a very low
density of shots from this area. So while it may be true that LeBron tends to overshoot from the
top of the key relative to his teammates, the lineup shoots so infrequently from this area that the
ineﬃciency is negligible.
LeBron James JR Smith Kevin Love Kyrie Irving Tristan Thompson
−0.02
0.00
0.02
PLC per shot
Figure 9: ˆPLC
Shot
surfaces for the Cleveland Cavaliers starting lineup.
For every red region in Figure 9 (undershooting) there are corresponding blue regions (over-
shooting) among the other players. This highlights the fact that LPL is made up of balancing player
contributions from undershooting and overshooting; for every player who overshoots, another player
(or combination of players) undershoots. By nature of how LPL is constructed, there cannot be
any areas where the entire lineup overshoots or undershoots. For this reason, our method does not
shed light on shot selection. LPL and PLC say nothing about whether shots from a given region
are eﬃcient or not, instead they measure how eﬃciently a lineup adheres to optimal allocative
eﬃciency given the shot attempts from that region.
4 Optimality - Discussion and Implications
We have now deﬁned LPL and given the theoretical interpretation (i.e. overuse and underuse), but
we have not yet established that this interpretation is valid in practice. The utility of LPL as a
diagnostic tool hinges on the answers to four questions, which we explore in detail in this section:
15