2 Models
The foundation of our proposed allocative eﬃciency metrics rest on spatial estimates of both player
FG% and ﬁeld goal attempt (FGA) rates. With some minor adjustments, we implement the FG%
model proposed in Cervone et al. (2016). As this model is the backbone of the metrics we propose
in Section 3, we thoroughly detail the components of their model in Section 2.1. In Section 2.2, we
present our model for estimating spatial FGA rates.
2.1 Estimating FG% Surfaces
Player FG% is a highly irregular latent quantity over the court space. In general, players make
more shots the closer they are to the hoop, but some players are more skilled from a certain side
of the court and others specialize from very speciﬁc areas, such as the corner 3-pointer. In order
to capture these kinds of non-linear relationships, Cervone et al. (2016) summarizes the spatial
variation in player shooting skill by a Gaussian process represented by a low-dimensional set of
deterministic basis functions. Player-speciﬁc weights are estimated for the basis functions using a
Bayesian hierarchical model (Gelman et al. 2013). This allows the model to capture nuanced spatial
features that player FG% surfaces tend to exhibit, while maintaining a feasible dimensionality for
computation.
We model the logit of πj(s), the probability that player j makes a shot at location s, as a linear
model:
log
( πj(s)
1− πj(s)
)
= βββ′x + Zj(s). (1)
Here βββ is a 4× 1 vector of covariate eﬀects and x is a 4× 1 vector of observed covariates for the
shot containing an intercept, player position, shot distance, and the interaction of player position
and shot distance. Zj(s) is a Gaussian process which accounts for the impact of location on the
probability of player j making a shot and is modeled using a functional basis representation,
Zj(s) = w′
jΛΛΛΨΨΨ(s), (2)
where wj = (wj1, . . . ,wjD)′ denotes the latent basis function weights for playerj and ΛΛΛΨΨΨ(s) denotes
the basis functions. Speciﬁcally, ΛΛΛ = ( λλλ′
1, . . . , λλλ′
D)′ is a D× K matrix, where each row vector λλλd
represents the projection of the dth basis function onto a triangular mesh with K vertices over
the oﬀensive half court (more details on the construction of Λ ΛΛ follow below). We use the mesh
proposed in Cervone et al. (2016), which was selected speciﬁcally for modeling oﬀensive spatial
behaviour in basketball. ΨΨΨ(s) = (ψ1(s), . . . , ψK(s))′ is itself a vector of basis functions where each
ψk(s) is 1 at mesh vertex k, 0 at all other vertices, and values at the interior points of each triangle
are determined by linear interpolation between vertices (see Lindgren et al. (2011) for details).
Finally, we assume wj∼N (ωωωj,ΣΣΣj), which makes (2) a Gaussian process with mean ωωω′
jΛΛΛΨΨΨ(s) and
covariance function Cov(s1, s2) = ΨΨΨ(s1)′ΛΛΛ′ΣΣΣjΛΛΛΨΨΨ(s2).
5