the game level. Speciﬁcally, we regress a team’s total game score against their total LPL generated
in that game, accounting for other relevant covariates including the team’s oﬀensive strength, the
opponents’ defensive strength, and home-court advantage. This framework is analogous to the
model proposed in Dixon & Coles (1997).
We calculate game LPL (GLPL) by ﬁrst dividing the court into three broad court regions
(restricted area, mid-range, and 3-pointers). Then, for a given game and lineup, we calculate
GLPL in each of these court regions (indexed by c) by redistributing the lineup’s observed vector
of shot attempts using on a weighted average of each player’s ˆξξξj:
GLPLc =
5∑
j=1
vc· fc(ˆξξξj)·
(
A∗
cj− Acj
)
, where fc(ˆξξξj) =
∑
i∈c wij ˆξij∑
i∈c wij
. (15)
In (15), wij is a weight proportional to player j’s total observed shot attempts in court cell i over
the regular season. The notation ∑
i∈c means we are summing over all the 1 ft. by 1 ft. grid
cells that are contained in court region c. Finally, for a given game g and team a, we calculate the
team’s total game LPL (TGLPL) by summing GLPL c over all court regions c and all lineups ℓ:
TGLPLag =
La∑
ℓ=1
∑
c∈C
GLPLℓ
c (16)
where C ={restricted area, mid-range, 3-pointers} and La is the total number of team a’s line-
ups. This process is carried out separately for the home and away teams, yielding two TGLPL
observations per game.
Equipped with a game-level covariate measuring aggregate LPL, we model team a’s game score
against opponent b in game g as
Scoreabg = µ + αa + βb + γ× I(Homeag) + θ× TGLPLag + ϵabg (17)
ϵabg∼ N(0, σ2), (18)
where µ represents the global average game score, αa is team a’s oﬀensive strength parameter, βb is
team b’s defensive strength parameter, γ governs home court advantage, θ is the eﬀect of TGLPL,
and ϵabg is a normally distributed error term. θ is the parameter that we are primarily concerned
with. We ﬁt this model in a Bayesian framework using Hamiltonian Monte Carlo methods imple-
mented in Stan (Carpenter et al. 2017). Our prior distributions are as follows: µ∼ N(100, 102);
αa, βb, γ, θ∼ N(0, 102); σ∼ Gamma(shape = 2, rate = 0.2).
The 95% highest posterior density interval for θ is (-1.08, -0.17) and the posterior mean is
-0.62.6 Therefore, we estimate that for each additional lineup point lost, a team loses 0.62 actual
points. Put diﬀerently, by shaving roughly 3 points oﬀ of their TGLPL, a team could gain an
estimated 2 points in a game. Given that 10% of games were decided by 2 points or less in the
6Figure 19 in the appendix shows the posterior distribution of θ.
18