low sample sizes, it can be problematic when entire neighborhoods have low sample sizes from
speciﬁc regions. For example, there are many centers who rarely or never shoot from long range.
Consequently, the entire neighborhood shrinks toward the global mean 3-point FG%, inaccurately
inﬂating these players’ FG%s beyond the 3-point line. These are intriguing challenges and represent
promising directions for future work.
30
40
50
60
70
80
FG%    
LeBron James' Estimated FG%
4
5
6
7
Std. Dev.
LeBron James' FG% Standard Deviation
Figure 3: LeBron James 2016-17 FG% posterior mean (left) and posterior standard deviation (right) projected
onto the oﬀensive half court. The prediction surfaces shown here and throughout the ﬁgures in this paper
utilize projections onto a spatial grid of 1 ft. by 1 ft. cells.
2.2 Determining FGA Rate Surfaces
We determine a player’s FGA rate surface by smoothing their shot attempts via a LGCP. This
model has the form
log λ(s) = β0 + Z(s),
where λ(s) is the Poisson intensity indicating the number of expected shots at location s, β0 is an
intercept, and Z(s) is a Gaussian process. We ﬁt this model separately for each player using INLA,
following the approach in Simpson et al. (2015). In brief, they demonstrate that the likelihood for
the LGCP can be approximated using a ﬁnite-dimensional Gaussian random ﬁeld, allowing Z(s)
to be represented by the basis function expansion Z(s) = ∑B
b=1 zbφb(s). The basis function φb(s)
projects shot location onto a triangular mesh akin to the one detailed for (2). The expected value
of λ(s) integrated over the court is equal to the number of shots a player has taken, however there
can be small discrepancies between the ﬁtted intensity function and the observed number of shots.
In order to ensure consistency, we scale the resulting intensity function to exactly yield the player’s
observed number of shot attempts in that lineup.
We normalize the surfaces to FGA per 36 minutes by dividing by the total number of minutes
played by the associated lineup and multiplying by 36, allowing us to make meaningful comparisons
between lineups who diﬀer in the amount of minutes played. As with the FG% surfaces ( ξξξ), we
partition the court into 1 ft. by 1 ft. grid cells and denote player j’s FGA rate at the centroid of
grid cell i as Aij.
Note that we approach the FGA rate estimation from a fundamentally diﬀerent perspective than
8