not coincidentally, the Thunder lost three of these four close-out games and never managed to make
it out of the ﬁrst round of the playoﬀs.
At its core, this critique is about shot eﬃciency. The term ‘shot eﬃciency’ is used in various
contexts within the basketball analytics community, but in most cases it has some reference to the
average number of points a team or player scores per shot attempt. Modern discussion around shot
eﬃciency in the NBA typically focuses on either shot selection or individual player eﬃciency. The
concept of shot selection eﬃciency is simple: 3-pointers and shots near the rim have the highest
expected points per shot, so teams should prioritize these high-value shots. The idea underlying
individual player eﬃciency is also straightforward; scoring more points on the same number of shot
attempts increases a team’s overall oﬀensive potential.
However, when discussing a player’s individual eﬃciency it is critical to do so in context of
the lineup. Basketball is not a 1-v-1 game, but a 5-v-5 game. Therefore, when a player takes a
shot, the opportunity cost not only includes all other shots this player could have taken later in the
possession, but also the potential shots of their four teammates. So regardless of a player’s shooting
statistics relative to the league at large, a certain dimension of shot eﬃciency can only be deﬁned
relative to the abilities of a player’s teammates. Applying this to the Oklahoma City Thunder
example above, if Westbrook were surrounded by dismal shooters, 43 shot attempts might not only
be defensible but also desirable. On the other hand, if his inordinate number of attempts prevented
highly eﬃcient shot opportunities from his teammates, then he caused shots to be ineﬃciently
distributed and decreased his team’s scoring potential. This aspect of eﬃciency—the optimal way
to allocate shots within a lineup—is the primary focus of our paper.
Allocative eﬃciency is spatially dependent. As illustrated in Figure 1, the distribution of shots
within a lineup is highly dependent on court location. The left plot in Figure 1 shows the overall
relationship between shooting frequency (x-axis) and shooting skill (y-axis), while the four plots on
the right show the same relationship conditioned on various court regions. Each dot represents a
player, and the size of the dot is proportional to the number of shots the player took over the 2016-
17 NBA regular season. To emphasize how shot allocation within lineups is spatially dependent, we
have highlighted the Cleveland Cavaliers starting lineup, consisting of LeBron James, Kevin Love,
Kyrie Irving, JR Smith, and Tristan Thompson.
2